

Index 


The Strategic Information and Research Development Centre (SIRD) is an independent publishing house 
founded in January 2000 in Petaling Jaya, Malaysia. The SIRD list focuses on Malaysian and Southeast Asian 
studies, economics, gender studies, social sciences, politics and international relations. Our books address 
the scholarly community, students, the NGO and development communities, policymakers, activists and the 
wider public. SIRD also distributes titles (via its sister organisation, GB Gerakbudaya Enterprise Sdn Bhd) 
published by scholarly and institutional presses, NGOs and other independent publishers. We also organise 
seminars, forums and group discussions. All this, we believe, is conducive to the development and 
consolidation of the notions of civil liberty and democracy. 


The Sejarah Melayu Revisited 
A Collection of Six Essays 
Ahmat Adam 


SIRD 


Strategic Information and Research Development Centre, 
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia. 


Copyright © 2020 Ahmat Adam 


First published in 2020 by 

Strategic Information and Research Development Centre 
No. 2 Jalan Bukit 11/2, 46200 Petaling Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia 
Email: gerak@gerakbudaya.com 

Website: www.gerakbudaya.com 


First impression, 2020 
Second impression, 2021 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior written permission of the publisher. 


Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia / Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 


Ahmat Adam 

The Sejarah Melayu Revisited: A collection of six essays by Ahmat Adam / 
Ahmat Adam. 

e-ISBN 978-967-2464-67-9 

1. Malays (Asian people)-History. 

2. Malay literature—History and criticism. 

3. Essays. 

I. Title. 

305.89923 


Cover design and layout by Janice Cheong 


Printed by Vinlin Press Sdn Bhd 

2 Jalan Meranti Permai 1 

Meranti Permai Industrial Park 
Batu 15, Jalan Puchong 

47100 Puchong, Selangor, Malaysia 


To my fellow Melakans 


Preface 


The essays published in this book were written primarily between 2010 and 2019. The essay entitled 
“Mystic Letters and Their Influence in the Malay World” is based on a lecture given to the Southeast 
Asian postgraduate students at the University of Oxford, during my tenure as a senior Visiting Fellow at 
the Oxford Centre of Islamic Studies in 2011. The research for this essay was carried out in Oxford itself. 

The papers on the Sejarah Melayu, or the Malay Annals, are the fruits of several years of research 
carried out in Malaysia, Leiden and London. During my sojourn as a visiting Senior Research Fellow at 
the History Department of the University of Malaya in 2010, and from 2012 until 2015, I had the 
opportunity of meeting Associate Professor Dr Victor A. Pogadaev, who was then teaching Russian at the 
Faculty of Languages and Linguistics. Dr Pogadaev was kind enough to mention the existence of a 
facsimile of a manuscript of the Sejarah Melayu that once belonged to Adam Johann von Krusenstern, 
which was in a book available at the faculty's library. I began working on the Krusenstern manuscript, 
which finally resulted in the recension of the Sulalat us-Salatin, published by Yayasan Karyawan in 2016. 

While in Leiden I also took the opportunity to continue my research on the Sejarah Melayu, which I 
had begun during my sabbatical from Universiti Malaysia Sabah. 


Abbreviations 


JMBRAS | Journal of the Malayan (Malaysian) 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 


SallaLahu alayhi wasallam (peace be upon him) 


Acknowledgments 


The writing of these essays would not have been made possible without the assistance and collaboration of 
several people and institutions. I am especially indebted to the Ministry of Culture and Tourism of 
Malaysia, then under Tan Sri Dr Rais Yatim, for the financial assistance given in 2011. It was through the 
ministry's generosity that I was able to conduct my research at the University of Leiden, the British Library 
in London and of course the Bodleian library at Oxford University. 

I would also like to express my deep gratitude to the librarians of several libraries, namely those of the 
University of Malaya, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia, the National 
Library of Singapore, the libraries of the University of Leiden, the Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast 
Asian and Caribbean Studies (KITLV), the Bodleian Library and its branches at Oxford, and the British 
Library in London. 

To my friends and fellow academicians who gave their support by inviting me to present seminar 
papers on several occasions, I wish to say thank you. I am also grateful to Datin Saidah Rastam and Mr 
Bert Tan of “Melaka In Fact”, for having invited me to speak on the history of Melaka in their seminars. I 
would also like to thank Dr Siti Zunairah binti Jaafar, another “Malaccan” who shows keenness in the 
history of Melaka even though she is from the medical profession, and has strongly supported my efforts to 
write a fresh interpretation of Melaka’s history. 

Lastly, thanks are due to my family members, especially to my wife, Datin Aysha binti Datuk Khalid, 
and our children, who have given their full support to my research and writing all along. 


Orthography 


The transliteration of Jawi (Malay Arabic script) to Romanised letters (Rumi) is based on the Library of 
Congress system. For example, the phoneme / ‘ayn / [ & | in Jawi is transcribed with the use of / ’ /. Other 
Jawi letters transcribed into Rumi are as follows: 


Glossary 


story, history, romance, fable, narrative, tradition 


tuha (Kawi) old, skilful leader, leader of a group 


A note on the text 


The Sejarah Melayu, as it is popularly known, is not its original title. It is actually the Sulalat us-Salatin 
yakni pituturan segala raja-raja. In these essays, the original title, sometime shortened to Sulalat u's- 
Salatin, and its other names such as the Sejarah Melayu, Hikayat Melayu and the (inaccurate) Malay 
Annals will be used interchangeably when referring to this classical Malay work. 

Certain terms, for example Old Javanese or Kawi, will be used interchangeably. The same goes with 
certain spellings, such as sura/surah. Archaic spellings in various languages (e.g. “Valentijn” instead of 
“Valentyn”) may occasionally appear. 

The names of several important copies of the Sejarah Melayu will be shortened for simplicity in-text. 
These are the: 
¢ Raffles MS No. 18, henceforth the Raffles 18; 


¢ Krusenstern manuscript, henceforth the Krusenstern MS; and 


e Farquhar Malay MS No. 5, henceforth the Farquhar 5. 


Questions on the authorship and origins of the Sejarah 
Melayu 


The Malay Annals and its variants 


The Sejarah Melayu, known in the ancient Malay courts as the Hikayat Melayu - or more correctly, 
Sulalat u’s-Salatin yakni pituturar’ segala raja-raja (genealogy-cum-recollection of Rajas) - is the only 
surviving text of the earliest Malay literary work to have been written about the Malays outside Sumatra. 
Erroneously translated into English as the Malay Annals, it has been regarded as the finest and most 
famous of all the Malay classics. Over four centuries since it was first written in the sixteenth century, 
there have been several editions, interpolations and revisions at different periods of time by alleged 
authors, copyists or court writers, thus resulting in a literary corpus of no less than 32 variants, kept at 
several libraries worldwide (Roolvink 1967: 301).* The principal theme that runs through the narratives is 
identical - there is little doubt that the author(s) intended to narrate, through their work, the fortunes and 
misfortunes that befell the Malay Rajas of the Melaka line. 

It was written with the purpose of providing a remembrance (Kawi or Old Javanese: “pituturan”) for 
the Malay Rajas to remind them of their duties, and to provide the succeeding Malay generations with a 
history of the genealogy of the Melaka Sultans and their successors, together with a chronicle of the Malay 
royal ceremonials. Underlying all these were subtle warnings about the folly of departing from the 
ancient covenant made between Demang Lebar Daun, the mythical ancestor of the Malay people, and 
Raja Sri Tri Buana,* in which both pledged that subjects and rulers had to be cognisant of their respective 
responsibilities. In their “contract”, the former had vowed that his descendants “shall be the subjects of 
your Majesty's [Sri Tri Buanass] throne, but they must be well treated by your descendants” (Brown 1983: 
16). Conversely, Sri Tri Buana made Demang Lebar Daun give an undertaking in return, that his 
descendants would be obedient and would never “for the rest of time be disloyal to my [Sri Tri Buana's] 
descendants, even if my descendants oppress them and behave evilly” (ibid.). 


Authorship 


Several generations since its first narration, the Malay Annals has undergone changes when subsequent 
so-called authors or copyists of later years weaved their own interpolations into the original narrative, 
thus resulting in several recensions. For the purposes of this study, this writer has undertaken a study of the 
contents, in particular the prefaces of some of the well-known versions of the Malay Annals, namely the 
Raffles MS No. 18 (or the Raja Bongsu manuscript),’ which was first edited by Sir Richard Winstedt (or 
R.O. Winstedt) (PMBRAS 1938 (16) 3: 1-155); the Blagden manuscript (Blagden 1925: 10-52), which 
was the nucleus of the Raffles 18 and according to Winstedt, narrated events prior to 1536; the Leiden 
Cod. Or. 12026 that belonged to Sultan Abdul Rahman Syah of Lingga (r. 1811-32); the Abdullah and 
Shellabear redactions and the English translation made by John Leyden between 1810 and 1812 
(published in 1821, with an introduction by Raffles); the Farquhar Malay MS No. 5 (1827);° and lastly the 
Krusenstern manuscript (1798).’ 

An exhaustive study of the Krusenstern MS has yet to be carried out in the English language, although 
a no less important edition was published in Russian by Dr E. V. Revunenkova (2008). It is believed that 
the Krusenstern MS is the second oldest copy of the text in existence, after the Raffles 18. It was copied in 
1798 by at least three copyists, whose names were Haji Muhammad Tahir al-Jawi, Muhammad Zakat 
Long and Ibrahim Jamrut (see the transliteration of the facsimile in Ahmat Adam [2016: 191]).° This 
version of the Sejarah Melayu may have been one of a kind (though probably copied from an older text) 


and was eventually published by a mission press in Singapore in 1840/41, introduced by Abdullah 
Munsyi. Either this text, or a similar one, was copied by Raffles’ clerk, Ibrahim Kandu, and translated into 
English by John Leyden (1810-12). It is for this reason that this writer thinks that to do justice to the 
discussion on the origins and authorship of the Malay Annals, several variants of the text need to be 
studied. While the Shellabear redaction has been the most widely read text, since it was first published in 
1896, it is nonetheless merely a hybrid text, for the “reviser” had relied on several sources for his 
recension (Linehan 1947: 105). William Shellabear used Leyden’s translation, a copy of the Annals from 
the Logan Library in Singapore, Maxwell’s MS No. 26 (1850), another copy (not earlier than 1856) that 
was owned by Munsyi Mohamad Ally, and the uncompleted revised French edition (1849) by M. Edouard 
Dulaurier (Linehan 1947b: 105), among others. 

Roolvink has categorised the texts of the Malay Annals into two prototypes: the short (standard) and 
long (extended) versions. Examples of the short version include the Farquhar 5 and the manuscript from 
Palembang (Roolvink 1967: 308-9).The short version, in which the last narrative concerns a request by 
Tun Ali Hati to Sultan Mahmud that he be put to death, actually forms part of the narrative of the invasion 
of Melaka by Afonso Dalboquerque. It had been used as the concluding narrative or chapter of the 
Krusenstern MS as well as many other recensions, many of which had relied on the Abdullah Munsyi 
redaction. The said chapter is also found in both the Raffles 18 and the Shellabear redaction. In the long 
versions, such as the Shellabear redaction, the Leiden Cod. Or. 12026 and texts of its kind, other episodes 
have been included after the killing of Tun Ali Hati: the text ends with the ascension of Raja Ali’ to the 
throne of Johor as Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah, who set up court at Pasar’® Raja (or Pasir Raja) in Johor 
Lama, and the chapter concludes with the statement about Johor being attacked by Jambi, which occurred 
in 1673 CE (1083 AH) (Ismail Hussein 1979: 191). 

The question that Roolvink raised viz. whether the short versions had formed the basis of the Raffles 18 
is an interesting one. In the Palembang version, the last chapter narrates the conquest of Melaka by the 
Portuguese, which is what the Krusenstern MS also does. The original manuscript, written after the 
Malays loss of Melaka, must have ended with the death of Tun Ali Hati and not the Portuguese attack on 
Johor Lama in 1535 as claimed by Winstedt. We think that the narratives in the Krusenstern MS (which 
should certainly be considered as one of the short/standard versions of the Sejarah Melayu) were later 
adopted by redactors or copyists as the basis for their texts, which were then interpolated with other 
episodes. 

Until now, the determination of the authorship of the manuscript and the date of its original 
composition are still being debated by scholars of Malay history, particularly in Malaysia. Many have 
drawn a conclusion that the author was none other than Tun Seri Lanang, the Bendahara (prime 
minister) of Johor. Some strong proponents of this view are Abdul Samad Ahmad and Muhammad Haji 
Salleh, Muhammad Yusoff Hashim and Teuku Iskandar, who share the belief that the Malay Annals was 
written in 1612 and became known as Raffles 18. While it may be true that the Bendahara Paduka Raja 
(Jelani 2009: 60, 158) was mentioned as the “author” of the Malay Annals by Nuruddin ar-Raniri in his 
work, Bustanus-Salatin (which the latter began to write in 1638), there is, however, no clear evidence that 
Tun Seri Lanang was the author of the 1612 recension. We believe that Tun Seri Lanang was a 
pseudonym: “Lanang” is a Kawi word meaning “man”. It is also difficult to ascertain whether the 
Bendahara Paduka Raja referred to was indeed “Tun Seri Lanang”, and whether ar-Raniri had even met 
the said Tun Seri Lanang during a hunting trip to Pasai (ibid.: 158)'' Despite the inclusion of his name in 
all later revisions of the Malay Annals (which we think were written after 1612), other copyists had 
nevertheless retained the part of the preface of the Raffles 18 which stated that it was Seri Nara Wangsa 
(also named Tun Bambang) who “came bearing on the head a command from the Ruler in the Lower 
Reaches’, to “make a chronicle of the genealogy of the Malay Rajas” (Raffles 18: preface). 

Regardless of the real meaning of the words, however, the fakir (servant) mentioned as the executor of 
the command was only a compiler, who by his own admission had assembled “all the stories of the men of 
bygone days” (Brown 1983: 2). It is quite obvious that his work was later copied by others who also made 


further interpolations. Whether or not the preface of the Krusenstern MS was based on the original text is 
difficult to determine. The word “Bendahara”, which was used in the preface of the manuscript and others 
that were copied in the nineteenth century (namely the Leyden, Abdullah Munsyi and Shellabearones), is 
not found in the Raffles 18 (1612). The Raffles 18 only mentioned the phrase “pada hari petuturan [sic, 
pituturan, Jawi: 04 |” which translated literally into English means “on the day of remembrance”. Thus, 
the “author-editor” of post-1612 Sejarah Melayu had replaced the word “hari” with “bendahara”. Even 
Winstedt himself thought that the word “hari” was inadvertently written instead of Bendahara.’ A 
discussion of the authorship of the Malay Annals, however, will not be satisfactory without perusing the 
relevant portion of its preface. Let us first look at the relevant portion of the preface in Raffles 18: 


... Now in the year 1021 H, in an early Dal year on the 12" of the month of Rabi'ul-awal, on Sunday, at the 
time of the forenoon prayer, in the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin Riayat Syah, shadow of God upon earth, 
while he had a settlement at Pasar [or “Pasir”] Raja — at that time there came Sri Narawangsa, whose name 
was Tun Bambang, son of Sri Agra’ Raja 

[ €4 2) of Patani, with a command from the Ruler in the Lower Reaches ... and the behest of his Highness 
was thus: “It is my wish that a chronicle be made of the genealogy of the Malay Rajas and the ceremonial of 
their courts, for the information of my descendants who come after me, that they may be conversant with 
the history and derive profit therefrom.’ 


When your humble servant ... heard the word of his Highness, he took the command upon his head and 
his limbs were bowed beneath the weight of it. Then he braced himself to be held up to ridicule in carrying it 
out deligently while at the same time beseeching help from God, the Creator of the Universe, and from His 
Prophet, the chiefest of mankind ..."* 


There are several pertinent points in the above preface: 


1. Many Sunni Muslims believe that 12 Rabi'ul-awal is the date that the Prophet Muhammad was born. 


2. The sentence “[n]ow in the year 1021, in the year of dwal al-awal [sic], on the 12" of the month of 
Rabiul-awal, on Sunday, at the hour of the early forenoon prayer,” in the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin 
Riayat Syah, shadow of God upon earth, while he had a settlement at Pasir (or “Pasar”) Raja ...” could 
be ambiguous, since there is no mention of Sultan ‘Alauddin being dead. It also implies that the Malay 
Annals could indeed have been revised by someone during the reign of one of two possible Sultan 
‘Alauddins: the (earlier) son of Sultan Mahmud and Tun Fatimah, who was the first Sultan of Johor 
(r.1528/29-64), or the (later) son of Sultan Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil Syah, who was the fifth Sultan (r. 1597- 
1613).’° They are not to be confused with their predecessor, Sultan ‘Alauddin of Melaka, son of Sultan 
Mansur Syah (r. 1477-81). 


3. There is no mention of an assembly of chiefs. The word “Bendahara” is not used; neither could we find 
the name of Tun Seri Lanang in the Raffles 18. 


4. The command was given directly by the Yang Dipertuan Di Hilir (Ruler in the Lower Reaches) to Tun 
Bambang. 


5. The name of the chronicle was given as Sulalat u’s-Salatin yakni Petuturan [sic, Pituturan] Segala Raja- 
Raja. 


Now compare the preface of the Raffles 18 above with the Krusenstern MS, which shares a close 
resemblance to all other texts listing Tun Seri Lanang as the author-editor: 


... Subsequent to that, the humble writer ... had on one occasion sat in the company of much superior 
dignitaries, spending lighter moments in conversation; among them there was a far superior chief who said 
to me: “I heard that there is a chronicle brought from Goa by the nobleman of Sogoh [sic Sagoe]'’; perhaps 
we could improve on it including its ceremonials, in order that it shall be known by our descendants of 
heretofore and that they will all remember it and reap benefits from it.’ After hearing such command, heavy 
were my limbs, a humble man named Tun Mahmud [ ** ],'® more tenderly known by the name, Tun Seri 
Lanang, designated as Bendahara Paduka Raja, grandson of the grandson of the Orang Kaya Paduka Raja, 


grandson of Bendahara Seri Maharaja, son of the Seri Nara Diraja, Tun Ali, son of Mani Purindan; he 
found God through the mystic way, and Malay being his race from Bukit Siguntang Maha Miru, the upper 
part of Malakat [ “S¥% 99 ] is his country, Batu Sawar abode of peace. 

These were his words: In the Hegira year of the Prophet may peace be upon him, one thousand and twenty 
one in the year of the early Dal on the twelfth of Rabiul-awal, on Thurday at the hour of early forenoon 
prayers, during the reign of the late raja who died in Aceh, Seri Sultan ‘Alauddin Riayat Syah, son of 
Sultan Mahmud, grandson of Sultan ‘Alauddin, great grandson of Sultan Mansur Syah, grandson of the 
grandson of Sultan Muzaffar Syah, son of Sultan Muhammad Syah, during the time when he was ruler in 
the country of Pase [p-a-s-y; sic, Pasir] Raja, at that moment there came to me Seri Nara Wangsa named 
Tun Bambang, son of Seri Agra Raja of Patani bearing the command of the Yang Dipertuan, Sultan 
Abdullah Mughayat [sic Ma’ayat] Syah, ibni Sultan Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil Syah [emphasis added]... 


... Such was the command of His Highness: “Verily we request the Bendahara that a history of the Malays 
be made together with its ceremonial so that it shall be known by our descendants who come after us, that 
they shall remember so that they shall reap benefits from it. After this humble self has composed himself I 
then braced myself to be held to ridicule’? towards working with assiduity on it; and pray for God’s 
guidance and ask for signs from the prophet, while also asking for holy sanction from the four companions 
of reverence. And so I compose this chronicle and I name it the Chronicle of Kings, that is the genealogy- 


cum-memorial of Kings ...”° 
There are several significant points in the Krusenstern MS which should be noted: 


1. The date 12 Rabiul-awal 1021 H, year of the early Dal (13 June 1612), is correct except that it was given 
as a Thursday instead of Sunday, which could have been a miscalculation by the compiler. 


2. The command was issued by Sultan Abdullah son of Sultan Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil Syah to Tun Bambang, 
which clearly contradicts the first statement that mentions the time as “during the reign of ‘Alauddin 
Riayat Syah son of Sultan Mahmud ...” 


3. This is the only version of the Malay Annals in which the author-editor categorically stated that it was 
revised some time during the reign of “the one who died in Aceh’, Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah (son 
of Sultan Mahmud). 


4. The Hikayat Melayu (Malay Chronicles) was brought by the Orang Kaya Sogoh, a title not of Malay 
origin but was that of an Acehnese chief of a local territory. “Sogoh” from the Acehnese “sagoe” [Malay 
“segi | refers to the territories ruled by chiefs. The territory outside Greater Aceh, the realm of the 
Acehnese king, was traditionally divided into three sides or territories forming a triangle, each being 
ruled by the Uleebalang.”' 


5. The command was written twice; first it was given by a man of chiefly position to a fakir (whose name 
was initially not disclosed), to have the Malay chronicle from “Goa’” that was brought by a chief of 
Sogoh [sic] improved. Then the name of Tun Seri Lanang was interpolated into the sentence “[a]fter 
hearing such command heavy were my [the fakir's] limbs a humble man named Tun Mahmud more 
tenderly known by the name, Tun Seri Lanang...” 


6. Tun Bambang’s name was only revealed as the bearer of the command of Sultan Abdullah Mughayat 
[sic] Syah” after the redactor had given the date and the time, that is, during the reign of ‘Alauddin (son 
of Sultan Mahmud). According to this preface, Abdullah is no longer described as Yang Dipertuan Di 
Hilir (Ruler in the Lower Reaches], Raja Bongsu (the youngest-born Raja) or Raja Seberang (the Raja 
across the river bank), but Sultan. This clearly indicates that the Malay Annals were written during the 
reign of Sultan Abdullah Mughayat [sic] Syah, who only ascended the Johor throne towards the end of 
1613. 


7. The command requested the Bendahara to work on (perbuatkan) the Hikayat Melayu, and the fakir 
braced himself for ridicule (perkunjaklah) to carry it out deligently. 


8. The name of the chronicle was given as Sulalat us-Salatin yakni Perturan [sic, Pituturan] Segala Raja- 


Raja. 

It is these contradictory statements in the above preface of the Krusenstern MS and others of its kind 
(which obviously came about as a result of the interpolation of the author-editor(s) of the post-1612 
versions of the Sejarah Melayu) that have brought about controversies regarding the “authorship” of the 
work. It has been argued that the words “datang menjunjungkan [emphasis added] titah” may also be 
translated as “[he] came bearing on his head a command for”. The suffix “-kan” in the sentence may in 
fact render the meaning “benefective”. Thus, one interpretation is that Tun Bambang was tasked with 
finding someone else to execute the command. 

In spite of this controversy, if one were to compare the prefaces of the Raffles 18 and the Krusenstern 
MS, it is quite clear that certain parts of the preface of the Krusenstern MS can provide us with a clue as to 
when this particular version of the Malay Annals was copied. As mentioned in the said preface, the 
revision was done during the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin Riayat Syah (son of Sultan Mahmud Syah). Since 
this particular ‘Alauddin was said to have been killed in Aceh in 1564, and bearing in mind that he 
ascended the throne after the death of his father in 1528, the Malay Annals would probably have been 
written between 1529 and 1564, though our guess is that it would have been most likely before 1536, 
since the last episode of this version only covered the events up to 1535 (Winstedt, 1938: 30). The author- 
editor of the Raffles 18 or the Blagden manuscript would have likely written his version (based on this 
copy) in 1612. After this date, however, another version was produced with several interpolations made by 
its reviser, namely the news that a Malay chronicle had been brought from “Goa” by a Dato’ of Sogoh [sic, 
Sagoe] and that Tun Seri Lanang’s name, though absent in the Raffles 18, was given as the author who 
wrote it after receiving instructions from “Sultan” Abdullah Mughayat [sic] Syah. 

According to several versions” that mentioned Tun Seri Lanang’s name and an almost complete 
background of his pedigree, the Sulalat u’s-Salatin was written during the reign of the ruler who died in 
Aceh, whom many scholars have wrongly accepted as the seventeenth-century Sultan ‘Alauddin, who was 
the arch-enemy of Aceh’s Sultan Iskandar Muda (r. 1606-36). But as the Krusenstern MS has shown, an 
earlier draft must have been written during the reign of the previous Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah, the 
first Sultan of Johor. It was this Alauddin who was killed by the Acehnese in 1564, probably because of his 
friendship with the Portuguese at Melaka.” 


Who was Tun Seri Lanang? 


According to several versions of the Sejarah Melayu, the person called Tun Seri Lanang was named 
“Mahmud” and not “Muhammad”. The Krusenstern MS, which to date appears to be the earliest copy of 
the post-1612 version and its kind, also mentioned “Mahmud” as his name.” It was only in the Abdullah, 
Leyden and Shellabear redactions that Tun Seri Lanang’s real name was stated as “Tun Muhammad”. But 
these texts were copied much later than the Krusenstern MS. 

Tun Mahmud gelar Tun Seri Lanang was the son of Tun Hamad [h-m-d] the Temenggung,”’ whose 
title was Paduka Raja (Ahmat Adam 2016: 261).”* Tun Mahmud, who became better known as Tun Seri 
Lanang, was probably appointed Bendahara Paduka Raja when he was in his late thirties or early forties 
at least. No young man could logically carry the burdens required of the Bendahara. Assuming that he was 
about thirty-five years old in 1575, he must have been born circa 1540. 

Tun Seri Lanang was said to have been appointed Bendahara immediately after the death of the old 
Bendahara Paduka Raja, during the reign of Sultan Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil Syah (r. 1570/1571-97), who 
was also the former Raja Omar of Pahang. From the Portuguese sources, we are informed that Sultan Ali 
Jalla Abdul Jalil, whom the Portuguese called “Raialle”, was already established at Johor Lama, which the 
Portuguese attacked unsuccessfully in 1576 (Macgregor 1955: 87; Gibson-Hill 1955: 139-140). When 
Johor Lama was besieged by the Acehnese in 1582, Tun Seri Lanang was most probably the incumbent 
Bendahara. Following the death of Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil Syah, however, Tun Seri Lanang continued to 
serve under his son, Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah, who set up court at Pasar [sic] Raja,” on the upper 


kuala (confluence) of Sungai Riun (the Riun River), around 1608. ‘Alauddin was described as “a lazy and 
indolent prince, sleeping almost the whole day, getting drunk, and amusing himself with his women, 
whilst he left the business of government to his brother, Raja Bongsu and to the high court dignitaries” 
(Hervey 1885: 134 -— 135),*? meaning that it was Raja Abdullah, the Raja Bongsu, who handled the 
governance of the kerajaan (kingdom) under the guidance of Tun Seri Lanang. But while ‘Alauddin lived 
at Pasar Raja, Raja Bongsu built his residence across the river at Pengkalan Rama, thus giving him the title 
Raja Seberang (the Prince on the Opposite Bank, see MSS 1). 

We do not know when exactly the Bendahara undertook the task of writing the Malay Annals, but to 
sum up, the Shellabear recension and its kind claimed that Tun Seri Lanang was the author-editor, and 
that it was copied in 1612 during the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin Riayat Syah (son of Sultan Ali Jalla Abdul 
Jalil Syah), who was Sultan of Johor from 1597 until 1613 but became a fugitive until after 1616 or until a 
period before 1622.” The copyist or editor of the Raffles 18 does not mention the name or pedigree of Tun 
Seri Lanang. The so-called “fakir” mentioned in the text gives us no clue that Tun Seri Lanang was the 
author-editor. Nevertheless, despite the Raffles 18 being quite clear about Tun Bambang carrying out the 
command given by the Raja Di Hilir; the Malay words “menjunjungkan titah” could be literally translated 
as “to carry out the command on the head”. This may be interpreted that while orders were given to Tun 
Bambang, it fell to somebody else to execute (the “fakir” in mid-1612). But whether “fakir” refers to Tun 
Seri Lanang or not is difficult to speculate. And there was also the possibility of Tun Bambang revising the 
Sulalat u’s-Salatin in 1612. 

Be that as it may though, it is difficult to imagine that the Malay Annals could have been completed in a 
short period of time (i.e. in 1612 or early 1613) considering the circumstances surrounding court life at 
Batu Sawar and the busy schedule of a “fakir’, who was undoubtedly a court official. To make matters 
worse, any intention of completing the work would have been nipped in the bud by the onslaught of the 
Acehnese forces on Batu Sawar in June 1613, which utterly destroyed Sultan ‘Alauddin’s (son of Sultan 
Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil) court after a siege of twenty-nine days. After the forces of Iskandar Muda had 
devastated Batu Sawar, they rounded up every high-ranking official of the court and took them as captives 
to Aceh. One of these officials was most likely the Bendahara, who must have accompanied the Johor 
prisoners. But existing sources seem to show that while Raja Bongsu, or Abdullah, remained in captivity 
with the other members of the Batu Sawar court, the incumbent Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah somehow 
managed to escape to Bentan (Marsden 1986: 440; Foster 1934: 169-170, 172). 

Perhaps because of ‘Ala'uddin’s escape, Iskandar Muda allowed Raja Bongsu to return to Johor in late 
1613. The Acehnese Raja had not only installed Raja Bongsu as the ruler of Johor with the title of “Sultan 
Abdullah Mughayat [sic, Maayat] Syah’, but also married him off to his younger sister (Gibson-Hill 1956 
(a): 130-131). Although nominally free, Abdullah was always under the watchful eyes of Iskandar Muda. 
In early 1615, he was summoned to Aceh to participate in a planned attack on Melaka - the Acehnese war 
fleet, consisting of five hundred ships and sixty thousand men, equipped with large canons and other 
weaponry, then sailed to launch a failed attack on Melaka, following which the Acehnese army retreated 
to Bengkalis (Marsden 1986: 141). The Sultan of Johor, however, only returned to Batu Sawar in the first 
quarter of 1616 (Hooykaas 1947: 98). 

While there is no written evidence to show that Tun Seri Lanang stayed for good in Aceh or whether 
he had returned to Batu Sawar in September 1614 together with Sultan Abdullah, local Acehnese 
tradition nevertheless strongly points to the fact that Tun Seri Lanang was appointed some kind of 
chieftain, possibly to the level of uleebalang, in the district of Samalanga by Sultan Iskandar Muda (Daud 
& Sakti 2010: 202). Although the Acehnese “Sarakata” belonging to Tengku Di Meulek did mention the 
appointment of a Teuku Bendahara in Samalanga in 1022 H (Daud & Sakti 2010: 202-204), there was no 
mention of Tun Seri Lanang whatsoever. Even the date is suspect. There was a very strong likelihood that 
the date had been interpolated by the writer or other copyists, since the position of the Bendahara during 
the establishment of Dutch administration in Aceh had very much to do with the right to inherit tracts of 
land in the district of Samalanga.”* Another strong reason to dismiss this claim is the fact that there were 


other Malay chiefs, including other Bendahara who were exiled to Aceh, namely the Perak Bendahara, 
Raja Bendahara, Penghulu Bendahara, Bendahara Darussalam (Tun Seri Lanang’s grandson) and 
members of the Kedah, Perak, and Pahang nobilities (See Adat Aceh in MSS Or. 459). 

Nonetheless, internal evidence of the Sejarah Melayu seems to support the thesis that Tun Seri Lanang 
did not return to Johor but instead opted to stay in Aceh. Support for this claim is an interpolation by the 
copyist of the Krusenstern MS, which hints that the Annals were revised or recopied in Aceh at this time, 
probably by Tun Seri Lanang, who was in exile since the middle of 1613. 

In Narrative 26 of the Krusenstern MS (140), Tun Seri Lanang’s pedigree is given with almost 
complete details. He was said to be the son of Tun Hamad [h-m-d] with Tun Genggang alias Datuk 
Sayang [s-a-y-ng] (Krusenstern MS: 140). Tun Seri Lanang, dubbed “the Bendahara who went to Aceh’, 
was said to have had three sons and three daughters by his wife, Tun Aminah. They were Tun Komak [k- 
m-k] (probably a daughter), Tun Anom [a-n-m] (an elder son titled Seri Maharaja) and Tun Jenal (titled 
Bendahara Paduka Raja) also known as Datuk Sekudai, and Tun Ali (titled Paduka Maharaja), later to 
become Bendahara. The “Bendahara who went to Aceh” (read: Tun Seri Lanang) also had by his 
secondary wife (gundik) a son named Tun Rembau (titled Seri Paduka Tuan) who rose to become a 
panglima (war-leader) of Bandar in Aceh (see facsimile in Ahmat Adam 2016: f.148). Tun Rembau 
married the daughter of the Bendahara of Perak’’ and they had four children: Tun Aceh (titled Bendahara 
Dar al-Salam), Tun Perak (Raja Indera Bongsu), who married the daughter of Maharaja Tun Habib and 
an unnamed offspring. Tun Perak had three children. But we are only told that he had a son named Tun 
Habib (titled Tun Narawangsa), and a daughter who was married to Seri Paduka Tuan. 

This interpolation of Tun Seri Lanang’s life details is a key difference between the Raffles 18 and the 
Krusenstern MS. It can be found in Narrative 26 of the Krusenstern MS, between the story of the King of 
Kampar and that of Patih Adam, the Pangeran of Surabaya. Meanwhile, Narrative 16 of the Raffles 18 
begins with the equivalent story of the King of Kampar, but does not mention Tun Seri Lanang’s pedigree. 

On account of this interpolation, it can be surmised that even though the Raffles 18 does not mention 
Tun Seri Lanang as its author-editor, it is possible that the Bendahara of Johor revised the Malay Annals 
while in exile, probably some time between 1614 and 1616. He must have already been a very old man - 
he would have at least been 73 years of age when the forces of Iskandar Muda invaded Batu Sawar. 


The revision of the Sejarah Melayu in Aceh 


Based on the evidence, there is a strong possibility that the Sulalat u’s-Salatin was completed when Tun 
Seri Lanang was in exile in Aceh. The mere fact that the Malay chronicle from “Goa” (Aceh) was brought 
by an Orang Kaya of Sogoh [sic, Sagoe] suggests that it was written in Aceh but because of the many 
interpolations it is difficult to ascertain its authenticity. To sum up, a so-called Orang Kaya (an Acehnese 
title) of “Sogoh’, which refers to a chief from the Sagoe (local district), arrived with a copy of the Hikayat 
Melayu from “Goa”. His arrival is mentioned in the Krusenstern MS, Shellabear and other similar versions 
of the Malay Annals which list Tun Seri Lanang as the “author”. Interestingly, the fact that the incident 
took place during the reign of Sultan Abdullah Mughayat [sic] Syah, who ascended the throne in late 
1613, is another piece of evidence. So was the mention of Tun Rembau, Tun Seri Lanang’s son, who held 
the post of war-leader in Bandar [Darussalam], Aceh. The fact that the Shellabear edition mentioned 
Sultan ‘Alauddin Riayat Syah as “the one who died in Aceh” was an interpolation since it was the earlier 
Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah (son of Sultan Mahmud) who was killed in Aceh, and not the later 
‘Alauddin (son of Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil Syah). 

Winstedt has argued that there is also the possibility that Tun Seri Lanang’s name and his genealogical 
pedigree could have been interpolated at a later period by someone who probably knew of Tun Seri 
Lanang’s role as the author-editor of the Malay Annals, and it was also not improbable that the 
interpolation was done after his death (Winstedt, 1938: 36). Although this might be the case, the 
Krusenstern MS nevertheless did include information about Tun Seri Lanang’s family background even 


though, as pointed out by Wilkinson, “Malays rarely claim the authorship of their own works’. 

The claim by many writers, Winstedt included, is that the Sejarah Melayu was copied in 1612 from an 
earlier draft during the reign of the third Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah, and this claim is probably true. 
Indeed, when Raja Abdullah instructed that the Malay Annals be written in May 1612, it was during that 
Sultan’s reign. But this could also be an interpolation of information from an earlier draft which was most 
probably written during the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah (son of Sultan Mahmud) “the one who 
died in Aceh”. This confusion was exacerbated by the assumption by many past and present-day writers 
that it was the ‘Alauddin who ascended the throne of Johor in 1597 who was taken captive and then killed 
in Aceh, allegedly in 1615. Although several writers, among whom were Cowan (1937: 5), Netscher 
(1870: 31) and Mohammad Said (1979 (1): 248), suggested that Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah (son of Ali 
Abdul Jalil Syah) did meet his death in Aceh, the claim cannot be proven. The sentence “during the reign 
of the the late [Sultan] who died in Aceh [Marhum yang mangkat di Aceh]”,** was actually a reference to 
the earlier Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah. There is practically no evidence to show that the second Sultan 
‘Alauddin had been killed, for in 1615 the said Sultan was still a free man. In August he had in fact signed 
a treaty with the Portuguese in Melaka, with one of its conditions being that the Portuguese would escort 
his son, Raja Bujang, to stake his claim to the Pahang throne by virtue of the latter’s marriage to a princess 
of the Pahang royal family. In November 1615, ‘Alauddin was reportedly seen in the Singapore Strait 
(Gibson-Hill, 1956: 137). But his name seemed to have disappeared from the Dutch records in 1616. The 
author-editor of the 1612 text had probably known of the Malay Annals being first written during the 
reign of the first Sultan of Johor. 

In the history of Acehnese relations with the Malay peninsula, there was only one Sultan ‘Alauddin 
Riayat Syah who died in Aceh. This Raja, who was the first Sultan of Johor, was taken in captive by the 
Acehnese during the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin al-Qahar (r. 1537-71). The author of the earlier draft of the 
Krusenstern MS was very certain of which ‘Alauddin was being referred to when he stated that the 
Sejarah Melayu was written during the reign of “Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah, son of Sultan Mahmud 
Syah”. The copyists in 1798 appeared to have merely recopied an earlier draft which implied that the 
original Sejarah Melayu must have been written during the reign of the ruler “who died in Aceh’. But 
interpolations made by other copyists had given the name of a different ‘Alauddin. As a result, many 
students of the Malay Annals wrongly perceived that this Raja was killed by Iskandar Muda in Aceh in 
1615. 

With regard to Sultan Abdullah Mughayat [sic] Syah, friction occurred between him and Iskandar 
Muda in 1617. The latter was not happy to see Abdullah’ nephew, Raja Bujang, associating himself with 
the Portuguese, which led to Aceh’s attack on Pekan, the royal capital of Pahang. Although Raja Bujang 
managed to escape, his father-in-law and his brother-in-law (later to be made Sultan with the title, Sultan 
Iskandar Thani, in Aceh), were made captives. This incident prompted Sultan Abdullah (Raja Bongsu) to 
withdraw to Bentan. In that same year he sent his wife back to her brother, Iskandar Muda. In 1618, 
Sultan Abdullah Mughayat [sic] Syah thought it prudent to establish himself at Lingga, where he was 
joined by Raja Bujang. However, at the beginning of 1623, the Sultan was expelled by the Acehnese and 
was forced to flee to the Tambelan Islands, where he died in March the same year. As for the fate of Sultan 
‘Alauddin Riayat Syah, not much is known except that he was succeeded by his son Raja Bujang in 1623 
and it has been speculated that ‘Alauddin himself must have died between 1616 and 1622 (Gibson-Hill 
1956(a): 137). 

Since the original author of the Krusenstern MS had stated that the Malay Annals were written during 
the reign of Sultan Alauddin Riayat Syah (son of Sultan Mahmud Syah), then it can be surmised that 
despite the interpolation of Tun Seri Lanang’s name by the copyists and the mismatching of the name of 
the day of the week in the Muslim calendrical year, the Krusenstern MS, like the Raffles 18, was based on a 
much older “master text” which was written during the reign of “the one who died in Aceh”. The author of 
the draft copy of the Blagden manuscript must have continued from where the original Melaka author had 
ended his narratives, that is, regarding the death of Tun Ali Hati. 


The possibility of the author using other manuscripts to write the narratives cannot be ruled out either. 
As pointed out by Winstedt, the sections on the early history of Pasai must have been extracted from the 
Hikayat Raja Pasai (Pasai Chronicle). But if Leyden’s listing of the titles of several early Malay 
manuscripts or hikayat are to give us a lead (See Hooker 2001: 29-30), it is also possible that the author of 
the Malay Annals could have used other hikayat such as the Hikayat Raja-Raja Melayu, a manuscript 
whose title is almost similar to the Ceritera asal raja-raja Melayu punya keturunan,” and a “kinglist” viz. 
the first part of Maxwell 105, a brief version of which is also found in Raffles 18 (Roolvink 1967: 306- 
307). 

The existence of the different redactions of the Malay Annals clearly shows that they were copied from 
a nucleus “master text”, most probably written by a Melaka author (Winstedt 1938: 27). It is also possible 
that the Raffles 18 was based on a draft that was quite different from the Krusenstern MS. The different 
choices of words for the Javanese poetry in the narrative about the Melaka ruler’s visit to the Majapahit 
court serves as evidence. Nonetheless, for some of the redactions produced after 1612, it looks as though 
more than one copyist was involved, like the Krusenstern MS which had three copyists. Interestingly, the 
Krusenstern MS differs from the Abdullah Munsyi and Munsyi Mohamad Ally manuscripts in terms of 
the arrangement of the chapters, or narratives. For example, Narrative 11 in the Abdullah and Shellabear 
versions are Narrative 12 in the Krusenstern MS.” But starting from Narrative 13, both the Krusenstern 
and Abdullah manuscripts follow the same order. The story of Sultan Mansur Syah’s visit to Majapahit, for 
example, forms Narrative 14 in both the Krusenstern and Shellabear versions, but is in Narrative 9 of the 
Raffles 18. 

In his 1938 work, Winstedt had correctly pointed out that the Raffles 18 is the only manuscript that 
provides the correct name for the Hegira year of 1021 (which was a Dal Awal) and the correct day of the 
week (which was Sunday, 12 Rabiul-awal) (13 May 1612). But was the Raffles 18 a copy of the oldest 
draft? E W. Douglas, who used to posses two manuscripts of the Malay Annals, which he had given to the 
Selangor Museum (but were presumed destroyed by the bombing of the museum in 1945 following the 
allied forces onslaught on the Japanese), had pointed out that the earliest edition was dated 12 Rabiulawal 
1020 H (25 May 1611). This edition was written at Pekan Tuh [sic, Tuha] (Douglas 1941: 34). It is 
interesting to note that Pekan Tuh[a] was the location of the residence of ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah (son of 
Sultan Mahmud Syah). It is also worth noting that Munsyi Mohamad Ally’s manuscript of the Sejarah 
Melayu (MS 86 DBP) and the Malay MS 1 of the John Rylands Library in Manchester (that bear Tun Seri 
Lanang’s name as the author-editor) also show the date 12 Rabiul-awal 1020 H (25 May 1611) which was 
a Ha year, earlier than the Raffles 18. This date poses the question of whether this is the correct date of the 
Malay Annals’ revision,” and not 1021 H (1612 CE). Incidentally, the date 12 Rabiul-awal 1021 H would 
correctly fall on Wednesday, and not the Thursday given by all the versions listing Tun Seri Lanang as the 
author-editor. 

Regardless of whether it was written in 1611 or 1612, it is our opinion that by going through some of 
the more important versions of the Malay Annals, especially the Blagden manuscript which Winstedt said 
formed the last eight narratives of the Raffles 18, the Krusenstern MS (now kept in the Archive of the 
Institute of Oriental Manuscripts, Saint Petersburg), and the Abdullah and Shellabear redactions, a 
reappraisal of the authorship of the Malay Annals can be made. While we may agree with Winstedt that 
the author of the Sejarah Melayu may have been inspired by the texts of the Javanese Damar Wulan and 
Panji Tales to write about Hang Tuhas adventure in Majapahit, we should also realise that only a man 
with a high degree of proficiency in old Javanese could have written such a beautiful piece on the Melaka 
ruler's visit to the Majapahit court. 

When a comparison of the poetry and Javanese words copied in the different redactions is made, 
however, we find that only the copyists of the Raffles 18 and the Krusenstern MS made a serious attempt to 
write them in full, whereas the compilers of the Abdullah and Shellabear texts did not. As was stated 
earlier, the obvious differences found between the Javanese poetry of both texts seem to point to the fact 
that the author-editors might have used two different drafts to copy from. The discrepancies and 


inaccuracies in the transliteration of certain Javanese words in Jawi script in all the popular redactions 
has led to the misreading of the words by some of the copyists - and as a result of their inconsistencies in 
spelling and also their poor handwriting, caused others to give different but unintelligible interpretations. 
This can only be explained by the fact that some of the manuscript copies were only produced at a later 
period.** But there are also cases where past and present-day writers have not been able to accurately 
decipher the Jawi script used to write such words and phrases. This is clearly evident from the mistakes 
made by scholars such as Winstedt, Brown, Datuk Madjo Indo, Abdul Rahman Ismail, Abdul Samad 
Ahmad and Muhammad Haji Salleh when they failed to make sense of the Javanese words in the poetry 
found in the narrative of the visit of the Melaka entourage to the court of Majapahit. 

Looking at the differences between both the Raffles 18 and the Krusenstern MS with regard to the 
Javanese poetry and as well as words of Javanese origin, it becomes clear that the words in the said poetry 
are less corrupted in the former than the latter.” Likewise, the Abdullah and Shellabear redactions also 
revealed that the Javanese words and phrases had not been accurately copied, an indication that either the 
copyists did not know the language or had little understanding of Middle or New Javanese.” It also makes 
one wonder why the Abdullah and Shellabear versions had left out, in their entirety, the beautiful eight- 
line verse in the Raffles 18 that formed the kidung (for its English translation, see Brown 1983: 70). Even 
the statement describing the excitement of the crowd at the sight of the Javanese warrior, Sangka Ningrat, 
was missing. The absence of the Javanese verses seems to show that both the Abdullah and Shellabear 
redactions had relied on a similar version as their source (which was probably of a later draft). Even 
though the copyists who produced the Krusenstern MS had diligently copied all the poetry in 1798, they 
nevertheless made several errors in copying several of the words in Javanese, an indication that all or at 
least one of them could not read Javanese well. But the fact that they copied the verses fully shows that they 
might have obtained a manuscript that was quite different from the source used by those in the Shellabear, 
Abdullah and similar redactions. The inclusion of the more complete verses of the Javanese kidung shows 
that it was, like the Raffles 18, also copied from earlier drafts. 

Thus, based on numerous other Javanese words and phrases being used by the original author, 
especially in the earlier narratives*’ where they are found, the possibility of the author being a Malay of 
Javanese descent cannot be ruled out.” It is worth noting that even the word “Lanang” is Javanese. One 
should also be reminded that during the last days of the Melaka sultanate, the Javanese community in 
Melaka was quite sizeable, and they also had their own community leaders and areas of residence.” 

There is little doubt that an original text of the Malay Annals, that was written by someone who 
witnessed the last days of the Melaka sultanate, did exist. The author, who outlived the Portuguese 
conquest in 1511, must have followed Sultan Mahmud's flight from Melaka, which ultimately brought him 
to Bentan. It was there that the former Melaka ruler mostly remained between 1520 and 1526, before 
moving to south Johor the following year (Macgregor 1955: 74, 84). It is not improbable that another 
unknown author who had also served Sultan Mahmud Syah in Bentan and later his son, Sultan ‘Alauddin 
Riayat Syah, had continued from where the chapter ended with the story of Tun Ali Hati’s death. 
Whoever revised the early draft of the Sejarah Melayu must have written his text during the reign of this 
‘Alauddin Ri‘ayat Syah, since the narrative ends with events happening around 1535. In 1612, when Tun 
Bambang was asked to “improve” upon the manuscript, he must have obtained a manuscript that 
contained episodes after the death of Tun Ali Hati, and ended it with the killing of Patih Ludang by Sang 
Setia. This is evident from the eight narratives in the Blagden manuscript (Blagden 1925: 10-52) which, 
according to Winstedt, contain the nucleus of the ordinary version of the Sejarah Melayu (Winstedt 1938: 
Preface; 27, 33). Other copyists, who had also used sources which ended with the death of Tun Ali Hati, 
had later interpolated names, places and other events until the texts (like the Shellabear version) became 
hybrids which also introduced Tun Seri Lanang’s name and genealogy (Shellabear 1981: 156-157, 206). 


Title of the Malay Annals 


10 


That the author-editors of both the Raffles 18 and the Krusenstern MS had made use of earlier drafts can 
also be ascertained from the title of the Annals. The title had been misunderstood even when Winstedt 
wrote his commentary in 1938. Since then, many scholars have repeated the mistakes made by Winstedt. 
The source of that error is that the Javanese word “hari”, or more appropriately “ari”, in the opening 
paragraphs of the preface in Raffles 18, which was misconstrued by Winstedt to mean the Malay word for 
“day” and was therefore considered it to be awkwardly misplaced in the sentence.” Actually “hari” [ari] 
in the sentence, “Bahawa hamba minta diperbuatkan ‘hikayat pada [h]ari pertuturan segala raja-raja 
Melayu” (Verily I request that ‘a chronicle be made of the memory (pertuturan sic, pituturan)* of the 
Malay Rajas, emphasis added), should be read as an “emphatic particle” in Old Javanese.” It could also be 
read as a term of address to more distant relatives or even unrelated persons.* In the context of the phrase 
“hari pertuturan’, therefore, also means addressing the people in the genealogical history of the Melaka 
Rajas. 

The copyist in 1612 had studiously copied the title of an earlier copy of the original manuscript called 
Sulalat u’s-Salatin yakni Pertuturan [sic, petuturan] Segala Raja-Raja. There is therefore nothing wrong 
with the sentence “Bahawa hamba minta diperbuatkan hikayat pada hari pertuturan segala raja-raja 
Melayu ..? (Verily I request that a chronicle be made of the memory [emphasis added] of the Malay 
Rajas” ...) except that the use of the word “pertuturan” [Jawi: p-r-t-w-t-w-r-n]” after “hari” (which 
forms part of the subtitle for the Malay Annals) had indeed confused many a copyist who then interpolated 
the name of Tun Seri Lanang in the text, and had the word hari erroneously replaced with Bendahara. 
This misreading of the phrase by the copyist(s) of the Malay Annals must have begun after 1612, as shown 
by the Krusenstern MS. It was also due to this that many have regarded Tun Seri Lanang, the Bendahara, 
as the author of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin. 

Upon taking a closer look at the words, however, it seems clear that the words “[h]ari pertuturan” sic, 
pituturan] are indeed Javanese words. Up to the present many have been led to accept, without question, 
Winstedt’s assumption that the words “pada hari pertuturan” are Malay words. Thinking that it was an 
orthographical error by the author, Winstedt went to the extent of suggesting that the words should 
instead be read “pada Bendahara peraturan..” (a disposition to the Bendahara...) which certainly is a 
misreading by Winstedt and those who agree with him. 

In his misreading of the word, Muhammad Haji Salleh has further exacerbated the issue by suggesting 
that “pertuturan” might be an archaic Malay word or perhaps a spelling error in Jawi and therefore should 
be replaced by “perteturun” (Muhammad Haji Salleh 1997: xv), a word that does not seem conceivably 
correct in Malay, and neither is it found in any Malay dictionary. Muhammad was guessing that 
“perteturun” must be a corruption of “perturunan” since other copyists had also used “perturunan” 
(descendants).?’ Abdul Rahman Ismail, nevertheless, has suggested that the original author of the Malay 
Annals did not inconceivably make a mistake in using the word “pertuturan” but was indeed saying that 
the work was written “on the day the conversation among the chiefs” took place (Cheah 2009: 13). But this 
view is also misleading because it is inconceivable to think that the word “pertuturan’, bearing the 
meaning of “conversation”, was in common usage even by the seventeenth century, for nowhere else in 
the Sejarah Melayu is the word “pertuturan” being used, except to mean “family” or “genealogy”. 
Whatever the case may be, it would be too presumptuous for anyone to believe that the original author 
could have made careless mistakes in his preface after having just begun a few lines. 

It was several decades ago that Roolvink pointed out that the word “pertuturan” exists in the Toba 
Batak language. In their language, “pertuturan” (from “tutur”) means “family” or having kindred ties. 
The verb “martutur” renders the meaning of “to relate the genealogy of each other's relative in order to 
determine the family connection” (Sinaga 1996: 362). But even though the root word “tutur” in the Toba 
Batak language also means “relative” or “having familial relationship’, or “the act of mutual narration of 
each other's genealogies with the purpose of understanding the family connections” (Sinaga 1996: 362), 
the Javanese meaning, nonetheless, is more correct, namely: “realize fully, memory, to be conscious, to 
recall or to reflect on as well as reminding, admonition, exhortation, advice, or to bring up memories” 


11 


(Wojowasito 1977: 280; Zoetmoelder & Robson 1982 [2]: 2085). They are much closer and more 
appropriate for the intended meaning of the Malay Annals. 

Based on the above argument we are convinced that only a person who was very well-versed or 
acquainted with the Old Javanese language could have used such a phrase as “pada [hari pertuturan [sic, 
“pituturan’ ].”. In English, the full title of the work would be “Sulalat u's-Salatin, that is, the history-cum- 
memorial [or genealogy] of Kings”. It was only much later, that is, after the Sejarah Melayu had supposedly 
already been rewritten by Tun Bambang (as claimed by some scholars) that the word “perturunan” was 
used by other copyists’ and later misinterpreted by Winstedt. But this misreading of the word 
“pertuturan” appeared to have been accepted by almost all copyists of the other versions of the Malay 
Annals, namely the Abdullah and Shellabear versions, and even most probably the redaction used by John 
Leyden for his translation into English. The only exception is the redaction quoted by Marsden from the 
writings of Petrus van der Vorm.** The Krusenstern MS is nonetheless not clear about the word because 
its copyists had written “perturan” [p-r-t-w-r-a-n] instead of “pertuturan”. What then can we deduce from 
this difference in the usage of the word? It is clear that the word “pertuturan” (also “petuturan”) used in 
the Raffles 18 has not been understood or recognised by many other copyists and later editors of the 
Sejarah Melayu as Old Javanese, which means to keep in mind, to remind someone, to address, or to 
advise.** The absence of this word with its meaning in Kawi in most versions of the Malay Annals is an 
indication that they were copied at a later date. 


Conclusion 


To the Malays, the Malay Annals is a special literary heritage. Its importance is evident from the numerous 
variants of the early text produced since the early seventeenth (or earlier) until the end of the nineteenth 
centuries. While the above discussion has attempted to deliberate on the origins and authorship of the 
Malay Annals, further studies need to be done, for not all aspects of the diverse texts have been fully 
investigated. While the Raffles 18 may have been regarded by many as the earliest existing copy of the 
Malay Annals that, according to some, was revised by Tun Bambang in 1612, it was certainly not the 
earliest text of the Sejarah Melayu. The above study has tried to show that the compilers of the Malay 
Annals were many and that they came from different periods and places in the Malay-speaking region. It 
seems that the various texts of the Malay Annals also share a common characteristic, that is: the short 
(standard) version that end with a chapter on the invasion of Melaka by the Portuguese in 1511 and the 
killing of Tun Ali Hati. As time passed by and other author-editors had come and gone, the Malay Annals 
also experienced redactions and interpolations. It is therefore logical to infer that the interpolations made 
by the author-editors to include events after the ascendancy of Sultan ‘Alauddin Riayat Syah (son of 
Mahmud Syah) as the first Sultan of Johor must have begun in and after 1612, where the ending episode of 
Tun Ali Hati’s death found in most of the redactions” was followed by the opening paragaraph of the 
usual Malay hikayat, that is, “Hatta Sultan Mahmud Syah pun memerintahkan kerajaan baginda, maka 
Tun Pikrama, anak Bendahara, dijadikan Bendahara bergelar Paduka Raja ..’ (After some time had 
elapsed, Sultan Mahmud Syah then set about bringing the administration of his kingdom into order and 
Tun Pikrama, son of the [former] Bendahara was appointed Bendahara, with the title Paduka Raja ...) 
Likewise, later on, Tun Seri Lanang who became Bendahara during the reign of Iskandar Muda at Aceh 
allegedly became the “author” and he too had a role in the interpolation of the Annals, as did many others 
who came after him.*° But the most important issue that this essay has tried to raise is the question of 
authorship of the early text of the Malay Annals or Sejarah Melayu. We think that the Sulatus-Salatin 
yakni [that is to say] Hari Pertuturan [sic, Pituturan| Segala Raja-Raja Melayu was the work of a Malay 
author of Javanese ancestry. His beautiful description of the royal visit to the Majapahit court and his 
mastery of the Javanese language as reflected in the kidung or tembang betrays his identity as someone 
with exceptional talent in the language. 


' I wish to record my appreciation and thanks to the Ministry of Information, Communication and Culture of Malaysia, for 


12 


giving me a grant to conduct research at the University of Leiden on the subject in 2011. 

? The usage of this word and its several different meanings will be discussed below. 

> According to Raimy Che-Ross (MBRAS 2002 (75) 2: 30), there are 44 manuscripts altogether (both complete and incomplete) 
in various libraries in Europe, New Zealand, Malaysia and Indonesia. 

* Sri Tri Buana (lord of the three worlds) is also known as Bichitram, Sang Supraba, or Sang Nila Utama. 

> Henceforth Raffles 18, which was also translated into English and edited by C.C. Brown. The manuscript was later edited and 
transliterated into Rumi by Abdul Rahman Ismail, who published it in 1995. Two years after that, the Raffles 18 was edited by 
Muhammad Haji Salleh. 

© Henceforth Farquhar 5. 

” Henceforth Krusenstern MS. 

’ A more complete discussion of the Krusenstern MS can be found in Chapter 3. 

” According to the Raffles 18 he was named Raja ‘Alauddin Syah after he was born (Brown 1970: 165). 

'0“Pasar’ is an Old Javanese word meaning “cemetery” or “graveyard”. In the context of the above sentence, “pasar” does not 
mean “market”. See Zoetmulder (2000 [2]: 788). 

'' A similar claim was also made by F. W. Douglas, in which ar-Raniri met Tun Seri Lanang in Aceh (Douglas 1949: 33). But we 
think that such claims are rather far-fetched since there is no written evidence that Tun Seri Lanang was really the Bendahara 
Paduka Raja referred to. Furthermore, Tun Seri Lanang was no longer around when ar-Raniri was in Aceh in 1637. The 
Adat Aceh recorded the presence of chiefs with titles like Paduka Raja, Paduka Tuan, Tuan [Tun] Seberang, which did not 
necessarily refer to Tun Seri Lanang (E.U.L MSS. 459). One should not forget that there was more than one Bendahara 
Paduka Raja of Johor. The Sejarah Melayu itself stated that the son of Tun Seri Lanang, Tun Jenal, was also nicknamed 
Bendahara Paduka Raja and called “Datuk Sekudai”. See Ahmat Adam (2016: 275-276). 

'2 See below for further elaboration. 

'5 “Agra” in Kawi means “the supreme’, “most important’, or “the most significant”, 
“the eldest”, “first-born” (Zoetmulder 2000 [1]: 13, 14). 

4 Translation based on Brown (1983: 1-2). 

'S The non-compulsory Duha prayers which some Muslims perform in the late morning, viz. between 8.00 and 10.00 o' clock. 

'¢ This will be discussed below. 

'7 From the Acehnese word “sagoe” which is pronounced /sagi/ (Malay: “segi”) meaning the “end”, “extreme point’, “district”, 
“village”, by Aboe Bakar et al. (2001: 832-833). 

'§ {m/h/m/d/ may also be pronounced “Muhammad”. 

'° Malay: perkunjaklah (also pergonjaklah). (Wilkinson 1959 (2): 626). 

© See preface in Ahmat Adam (2016: 3-7). 

1 “Uleebalang” in Acehnese refers to the chief of the army or the territorial chief. It is also a title for the Sultan’s orang besar, 
referring to the people in authority in the Sultan's district (Aboe Bakar et al. 2001: 1035). 

2 “Goa’ probably refers to a place in the Lhokseumawe region in northern Aceh. This writer thinks that Winstedt’s assumption 
that “Goa” refers to the state in India is very misleading. 

* This is the correct name of the half-brother of Johor’s second Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah. Sultan Abdullah Ma‘ahat or 
Maayat Syah is actually the correct reading, for “Mughayat” does not exist in the Arabic vocabulary. “Hamat Syah” is of 
course the corrupted European pronunciation of his name. 

*4 See Chapter 26 of the Sejarah Melayu (Shellabear 1981: 148). 

* It happened during the reign of the Acehnese Sultan, ‘Alauddin al-Kahar (1. 1537-71). 

*° In at least six other versions of the Malay Annals the name “Mahmud” was mentioned. See for example Malay MSS 1 

(Sejarah Melayu) kept at the John Rylands University Library of Manchester, Farquhar 5 and the Cod. Or. 12026 at the 

Leiden University Library, the MS 86 DBP the incomplete transliterated version in Rumi of Sejarah Melayu known as the E. 

U. L. MSS. Or. 458, New College 132, a microfilm copy of which Mkm 644 is available at Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia and 

the Raffles MS No. 35. 

Temenggung’ was the title of a high-ranking royal official responsible for keeping the peace in the realm. His superior was 

the Datuk Bendahara. See Soetan Mohammad Zain, Kamus Moderen Bahasa Indonesia, Jakarta: Grafica [19602]. 

8 On f. 147 (2) of the Krusenstern MS, however, the copyists erroneously wrote that Tun Mahmud, nicknamed Paduka Raja, 
was the husband of Tun Genggang. In the same sentence the copyists wrote that they begot a son named Tun Mamat or 
Mamut (m-m-t) [| cue | bearing the title “Bendahara Paduka Raja’. He married Tun Aminah. The copyists of the 
Krusenstern MS seemed confused when they wrote, “As for Tun Kedut, the grandson of Seri Amar Bangsa, Tun Pang (p-ng) 


[ @ ], is the one called the Datuk Bendahara who left for Aceh (see Ahmat Adam 2016: 276). In other parts of the 
manuscript, however, the phrase “the one who left for Aceh” was clearly in reference to Tun Seri Lanang. 

” The Jawi spelling, p-a-s-r / r-a-j is read by many as “Pasir Raja’. Both the Shellabear version and the John Rylands manuscript, 
however, say that after clearing the area, a settlement with a fortress made of Kulim timber at the Riun River was converted 
into a market. But “Pasar Raja’ in Kawi actually means “Kubur Raja” (Royal Cemetery). See also Gibson-Hill 1956 (a):126. 

* This is more or less verified by the Sejarah Melayu which described him as having no interest in the serious work of 
governance, but instead occupied himself with pleasures and entertainment, such as spending his time drinking and eating 
with the young hulubalang of his court. See MSS 1 at the John Rylands Library, University of Manchester. 

*! He was seen in the Singapore Strait in 1616 (Gibson-Hill 1956 (a): 137; Tiele, 1876: 303). 

* The Acehnese Royal Instruction or “Sarakata”, which according to some people was written during the reign of Sultan 
Iskandar Muda (known as Makota Alam), but had since been revised over the years under different rulers, mentioned that 
the order to appoint the Bendahara to administer the territory of Samalanga was given by Sultan Iskandar Muda. According 
to the Sarakata, the rights to inherit the territory of Samalanga by the descendants of the unnamed Teuku Bendahara were 
proclaimed on 7° May 1868 during the reign of Sultan Ibrahim Mansur Syah. See Daud and Sakti (2010: 202). On 


“ 


premier”; but the word “agraja” means 


27 « 


13 


commentaries on the said Sarakata, see Crecelius and Beradow (1979; 51-53). 

* Based on the Adat Acheh manuscript, we know that it was not uncommon for members of the Malay ruling elite to settle in 
Aceh after having been taken as prisoners of war. Among them were the Malay chiefs from Perak, Kedah and Pahang. See 
the Adat Aceh (copied by Orang Kaya Maharaja Melayu Paduka Seri Sultan ‘Alauddin Ahmad Syah) in E.U.L. MSS Or. 459, 
a microfilm copy of which Mkm 644 is available at the Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

* The Farquhar 5, the Abdullah and Shellabear recensions, and the MS 86 DBP (Munsyi Mohamad Ally’s MS) used by Abdul 
Samad Ahmad do not have these words in the preface. 

* Cod. Or. 3199 (3), part 4. See Appendix 1: Cerita asal raja2 Melayu punya keturunan in Roolvink 1967 (3): 301-324. Roolvink 
says that van der Vorm and Valentyn could have used this manuscript or a similar source of its kind. 

*© In the Shellabear edition, Narrative 11 is about the arrival of Raja Iskandar in Muar, while in the Krusenstern MS, it is about 
the Keling country and its Raja, Pahili. 

* In another version of the Malay Annals, the copyist claimed that it was written on 12 Rabiul-awal 1023 H (22 April 1614) 
which happened to be a Tuesday. See E.U.L. MSS. Or. 458 New College 132. Mkm 644 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

** For example, in the Krusenstern MS and the Abdullah redaction (Narrative 17), the name Datuk Sekudai actually refers to 
someone who, according to Winstedt, was around in 1640 and that Mansur Syah became Sultan of Perak only in 1654 
(Narrative 26). This would mean that the chapters concerned were written or interpolated after the said dates. 

* The poem in the Krusenstern MS also has seven instead of eight lines. It is possible, however, that the mistake was committed 
not by the original redactor, but by the 1798 copyists. 

* Personal communication with Dr Stuart Robson of Sydney, Australia. He says that the type of Javanese used in the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries was Middle and New Javanese. 

*! Especially Narratives 1-9. Narrative 9 has several lines of Javanese tembang, or lyrical poetry. See Brown (1983: 69-71). 

“ In fact the practice of engaging writers of Javanese descent was also done by a notable seventeenth-century Sufi from Patani 
named Syeikh Fakeh Ali bin Muhammad bin Safiuddin al-Fatani, who sought the assistance of someone from Bogor, West 
Java, who was then living in the residence of the Sultan of Patani, in writing the Tarikh Patani (The History of Patani). See 
Malik (2006: 21). 

* Even during the early period of Portuguese rule, one of the syahbandars of the Melaka harbour was a Javanese, who had 
jurisdiction over junks from the Moluccas, Banda, Palembang, Tanjung Pura, Brunei and Luzon. The Javanese were active 
traders and had their own bazaar. They lived in the Upeh district, not too far away from their bazaar. The “Jawah” 
community in Melaka also included Sundanese from West Java, and those from Tuban and Japara. They also lived in the 
vicinity of Banda Hilir, together with the Malays. See Thomaz (2000: 24, 48-49, 73-74). 

* The legacy of continuing the Malay Annals from time to time had been practised up to the late nineteenth century, as evident 
by the work of Tengku Said of Siak. See the facsimile of the Malay Annals (Codex Orientalis, Leiden 7304) written in 1893 in 
Yusoff Hashim, (1998). 

* For those who have no knowledge of Javanese, the word “pertuturan” which in Malay means “conversation” would give a 
peculiar meaning if translated into English: “to make a chronicle on the ‘day of conversation of all kings”. 

“© Emphasis added by this writer. 

*" It is an emphatic particle (e.g. “of”) for nouns and pronouns etc. used in both Javanese and Sundanese to bring out in full, 
which otherwise would be rendered by intonation. “Hari” can also take several word forms in the Kawi language. It can be 
“arih’, “ari’, or “harih’, all bearing, among others, the old meaning of “to soothe” or “to address with soothing or consoling 
words’. “Hari” also implies a time frame which is “ketika” in Malay, or “a point of time”. See (Zoetmoelder & Robson (1982: 
(1) 125-126; Hardjadibrata 2003: 37; Mardiwarsito 1981: 212). 

* See (Zoetmulder & Robson 1982 (1): 594-595; Prawiroatmodjo, 1957: 165; Mardiwarsito 1978: 75, 212; Satjadibrata 1950: 26) 

*” Emphasis added. 

* The word “pertuturan” has been misconstrued by Winstedt as a spelling error for the word “peraturan’. By calling the Malay 
Annals “Peraturan Segala Raja-Raja” (The Order or Conventions of Malay Rajas), Winstedt had inadvertently misled many 
people, including Malays. 

>! This word was used by Marsden who quoted Petrus van der Vorm. The latter could have obtained a copy of the Malay 
Annals that had “perturunan” as its subtitle. The word “pertuturan” was also used by the copyists of the Krusenstern MS 
who however misspelt or shortened it to “perturan” [p-r-t-w-r-a-n]. Similarly “pertuturan” seemed to have been shortened 
to “perturan” [p-r-t-w-r-n] by both the copyists of the Malay MS 1 and the Raffles 35 (“perturun’, which would not be 
appropriate in the context); but the latter had also written “perteturan” [p-r-t-t-w-r-n] (a corrupted form of “pertuturan’, no 
doubt) with regard to the command given; on the other hand, the writer of MS 1 used “peraturan” when describing the 
command of the Raja. Abdul Rahman Ismail’s reading of “perturan” [p-r-t-w-r-n] in the Raffles 35 as “peraturan” or 
“perturun” [p-r-t-w-r-n] is certainly incorrect. See Abdul Rahman Ismail (2008: 12). 

* The Farquhar 5 also has the words Sulalat us-Salatin, yakni perturunan segala raja-raja as its title. An incomplete copy of 
the Malay Annals in Rumi transliteration using Dutch orthography, however, used the word “pertuturan” and the date given 
for the revision is 12 Rabiul-awal 1023 H (22 April 1614). See E.U.L. MS Or. 458, Mkm 644, Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

>> Since Marsden himself had not seen the text of the Sejarah Melayu, the word “penurunan” could also be a misnomer by the 
Dutch writer Petrus van der Vorm. Marsden, while quoting Valentyn’s and Werndly’s works, also mentioned John Leyden’s 
paper as one of his sources when he revised and published the third edition of his History of Sumatra in 1811 (See Marsden 
1986: 326). 

* Incidentally the meaning of the root word “tutur” in the language of the Sundanese people in West Java, also includes: “to 
follow or to keep track of”, “succession of happenings’, “genealogy”, “history” and “moralising instruction (advice or 
reminder)” (Hardjadibrata 2003: 857; Tamsyah 1996:. 264). 

> See redactions by Abdullah Munsyi and Shellabear and the Krusenstern MS. Even the Palembang MS in Rumi that is kept at 
the Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, has a similar ending. 


14 


°° There were further interpolations when other versions were produced, resulting in the blending of the short and long versions 
into hybrid texts. Texts produced in the Riau-Lingga kingdom following the ascendancy of Bugis political power and 
influence after 1720 even had the account of Hang Tuha being a Bugis princeling from Mempawa. Another later redaction, 
namely the Tunku Said version, had also added events that stretched up to the occasion when Tengku Akil of Siak attacked 
Palembang, which led to the demise of Sultan Abdul Jalil of Sukadana. It is however worth noting that despite the 
interpolations and additions of this version by Tengku Said in 1893, the new Hikayat Melayu still maintained the structure of 
the Malay Annals which repeated the popular narrative that Malay history began with the story of Iskandar Dhu’l-Qarnayn 
(discussed further in Chapter 2). 


15 


The early history of Melaka according to the text of the 
Sulalat u’s-Salatin 


Introduction 


Until today, there are no less than a dozen complete recensions of the Sulalat us-Salatin that have been 
published since the early decades of the nineteenth century.’ Many of these recensions are found to be 
based on two principal manuscript versions of the Sejarah Melayu: namely those that bear the name of 
Tun Seri Lanang as the purported author (including the Krusenstern MS), and the more studied version, 
the Raffles 18.” The Tun Seri Lanang version had been edited by Francois Valentyn, possibly around the 
late sixteenth or early seventeenth centuries. Other versions published were that of Leyden (1821), 
Abdullah Munsyi (1840/41), Dulaurier (1849), Shellabear (1896 and 1898), Aman gelar Datuk Madjo 
Indo (1959), A. Samad Ahmad (1979), Muhammad Yusoff Hashim (1998), the Krusenstern MS, and 
others. The latter was translated by E. V. Revunenkova into Russian and was published in 2008 as her 
doctoral thesis, along with a facsimile of the original manuscript. It was by using this facsimile that this 
writer transliterated its Jawi text into Rumi and subsequently edited and annotated it, as well as added an 
introduction. 

Of the main versions of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin, the Raffles 18 (supposedly completed in 1612, also 
known as the “1535 version”) appears to have received greater attention. Many of those who have worked 
on it seem to agree with Winstedt’s opinion that the Raffles 18 is the oldest, since the events narrated had 
taken place during the reign of the first Sultan of Johor, Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah, son of Melaka's 
Sultan Mahmud Syah. This version ends with a narrative on the peace treaty signed between the 
Portuguese and the Malay sultanate as a result of the latter’s defeat in Johor in 1535. In comparison, other 
versions (known as the standard version), including the Abdullah Munsyi copy (1840/41) and the 
Krusenstern MS (1798), end with the narrative of Tun Ali Hati asking Sultan Mahmud Syah to end his 
life following the killing of his “master” Sultan Ahmad. These versions were supposedly authored by Tun 
Seri Lanang. Even the Jawi edition by Shellabear (1896) ends with Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah, the son 
of Sultan ‘Ali Jalla ‘Abdul Jalil Syah, founding his kingdom at Pasir [or Pasar]* Raja, concluding with the 
statement of Johor being attacked by Jambi. Meanwhile, the recension by Shellabear has been described as 
a hybrid text. According to Roolvink, one of the texts used by Shellabear was the Maxwell no. 26 
manuscript.* 

Not all versions of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin have been studied, though. For purposes of making 
comparisons, this writer has only managed to make use of the Raffles 18, the Krusenstern MS (now kept 
in Saint Petersburg, Russia), Abdullah Munsyi’s printed text of 1840/41, the Shellabear recension in 
Rumi and the Raffles MS. 39, which was copied in March 1812 with the name of Ibrahim bin Kandu 
written in its colophon.’ Another version referred to is the Or. Manuscript 14734, that was copied in 
1873. 

The Raffles 18 was copied in the early nineteenth century. Its text ends with the narrative of Patih 
Ludang,° who was murdered by Sang Setia and Sultan Muzafar Syah before his departure to Pahang to 
request that Sultan Alauddin Riayat Syah, son of Sultan Mahmud, return all the tribesmen (sakai) of Patih 
Ludang to Muzafar himself. After the story of the killing of Tun Ali Hati, found in the standard version, 
there are more narratives in the Raffles 18, beginning with the twenty-fourth and ending with the thirty- 
first narrative. Here, Winstedt transplanted eight narratives taken from the Blagden manuscript. This part 
of the Raffles 18 version shares similarities with the manuscript owned by Sultan Abdul Rahman Syah of 
Lingga. Based on my own comparative study of the content structure of several manuscripts, I have come 
to the conclusion that with the exception of the extended version of the Sulalat us-Salatin (also called the 


16 


long version), most copies conform to the standard version, ending with the Portuguese conquest of 
Melaka and the killing of Tun Ali Hati. Unknown to many scholars, the Krusenstern MS mentioned 
earlier is a prototype of the standard version. 

Because of their many similarities, I am certain that both the Raffles 18 and the Krusenstern MS were 
copied from two different texts, but have a common master text. The most obvious similarity is the 
sentence in the Raffles 18 that goes “during the reign of His Highness Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah ...” 
(without mentioning the name of Sultan ‘Ali Jalla), while the Krusenstern MS goes “... during the reign 
of the late ruler who died in Aceh, His Highness Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah zilullah fil ‘alam, son of 
Sultan Mahmud Syah ...”. As to when the master text was written, there is no one who can authenticate 
the exact date. However, Winstedt suggested that the original copy was likely to have been written by a 
polyglot who lived in Melaka during the reign of Sultan Mahmud Syah, and had witnessed for himself the 
events leading up to the conquest of Melaka by the Portuguese.’ 

In general, scholars of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin are well aware that the existing versions of the work are 
actually only later copies of the original, and that many of them have been rewritten since the beginning 
of the early nineteenth century, or the late eighteenth century at the earliest, such as the Krusenstern MS.° 
Over time, every version could include interpolations by individual copyists. It is thus difficult to really 
identify which versions are closer to the original. Nevertheless, based on the narratives describing certain 
historical or memorable incidents, one may speculate whether the text of a particular version is nearer to 
the truth. If foreign contemporary sources could be consulted (such as the records of the Ming Shi-lu),’ 
more accurate historical information may be obtained. Thus, the Krusenstern MS could have been the 
recopied version of a master text of all versions that have Tun Seri Lanang mentioned as their supposed 
author. While there is a tendency for researchers to believe that parts of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin had been 
written by different people during the reigns of different Sultans, there is the possibility of additions, 
continuations, updates and interpolations of narratives by different copyists in later periods, namely 
during the reigns of Sultan Mahmud Syah, ‘Sultan Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah (r. 1528-1646) and Sultan 
Abdullah Maiiyat Syah’’ (r. 1613-23) or those copied by different scribes in Lingga or Siak, Sambas or 
Melaka. 

Despite the possibility of interpolations, one thing is clear though. The original author of the 
recollection-cum-exhortation of kings must have had a special motive, namely to extoll the greatness of 
the Melaka sultanate and the various rulers of the kingdom. He saw Melaka as his universe (Josselin de 
Jong, 1964: 236) and its rulers as members of a dynasty that possessed its own genealogy, having its 
beginnings in the legendary Alexander the Great, the mythical kings such as Raja Suran, Demang Lebar 
Daun and Sri Tri Buana or Sang Supraba, all narrated with the sole purpose of showing the continuity of 
its unbroken genealogy. In other words, the original author's perception of history through the Sulalat u's- 
Salatin and his understanding of Malay historiography were intended to be a hagiography of Sultans - a 
pseudo-historical document that is functional in character." It was precisely due to this aim that the author 
felt responsible to pick his selective “facts” in order to reject or ignore certain historical episodes if they 
were not congruent with his perception of a great sultanate and a praiseworthy ruler, even though such 
episodes could very well be factually valid for historical records. Like the Greek historian Herodotus, the 
original author of the Sulalat us’-Salatin had not only invented the dialogues of his main characters, but 
included advisory insinuation and sacarsm to teach the rulers morality, in order to promote good 
character. 


The Sejarah Melayu is not a work of history 


That the Sulalat u’s-Salatin cannot be regarded as a genuine history text, or equated in the same category 
with a true work of historiography, according to the history model espoused by Ibn Khaldun (27 May 1332 
- 17 March 1406 CE) and Herodotus (485- 425 BCE), is generally recognised by contemporary 
historians. The narratives in such work of literature are a mixture of legends, myths and history. They are 


17 


interwoven in that manner because as the subtitle of the work reveals, the author wanted it to be “a book 
of remembrance, advice and counsel to the Malay rajas.’ This aim is revealed by the usage of the Kawi 
word “pituturan” which has been misread by many as “pertuturan” (conversation), “peraturan” (rules), 
“peturunan” (descendants), and “perturun” (having a hereditary). The Kawi word, which appears to have 
been copied correctly by the copyist of the Raffles 18 viz. “petuturan” [or pituturan] (spelt /p/t/t/r/n/ [ 
ot | in Jawi), bears several meanings, namely: memory, recollection, to regain consciousness, to reflect 
on, remember, keep in mind, to bring to realisation, and to give an admonition. Thus, this is a work of 
literature which was originally written with the hidden intention to remind the Malay Rajas of the 
necessity to act with proper conduct and not to abuse their royal position. 

Due to its nature of being a work of literature intermixed with myth, legend, fairytales (Brown 1948 
(12): 730) and “historical information” which have been perceived and understood by the Malays as 
history,” it would therefore be futile for today’s historians to take it at face value. A comparative study of 
other sources needs to be considered seriously, such as the use of Chinese records and available Portuguese 
sources. In trying to understand Melaka’s early history before the coming of the Europeans, the historian 
therefore cannot afford to rely solely on the so-called Sejarah Melayu alone if any historical truth is to be 
gained. 

The recent furore over the attempt by some Malaysian historians to use the Sejarah Melayu as a 
primary source for determining the founding date of the Melaka sultanate is a case in point (more on this 
below). Any attempt to interpret the Sejarah Melayu, even as a work of literature, needs careful reading of 
its text. The work contains multifarious forms of sarcasm, allegorical symbolism, as well as innuendos 
and insinuations by the author, which need to be understood by the reader when following the narratives. 
In addition to that is the problem of reading Old Jawi, in which the Sulalat u’s-Salatin was written. In fact, 
the misreading of several words in the original Old Jawi have contributed towards the misunderstanding 
and misinterpretation of the contents of the Sejarah Melayu among many copyists, readers and 
transliterators. 

Not surprisingly, this has also posed an enigma for many scholars, especially over the fact that the Old 
Jawi letters are usually marked by the absence of vowels, and sometimes even the dots for certain huruf 
(letters) have been left out (or added), thus leading to the misreading of the words and the 
misinterpretation of their true meanings. Take for example the word “Kaid”, which is spelt in the Jawi 
letters /k/y/d/ [ +5]. Most readers have pronounced it “Kida”, as in “Kida Hindi”, even though the word is 
Persian and means “king”. Another example is “Purna Lango’, the name of the Prince of Tanjung Pura 
who was marooned at sea. “Purna” is a Kawi word meaning “overwhelming” or “perfect”; and “lango” in 
Kawi means “lovelorn’, “longing”, “pining” or “yearning for love”. But several transcribers have misread 
the word in Jawi as “langu”, which actually means “having a sickening smell” or “something that is 
revolting”. It makes no sense to name a person “Prana Langu” as John Leyden did, or “Kirana Langu” 
(“Kirana” means “beam of light’, “ray”, or “moonbeam’”) as Shellabear and Teuuw had transcribed, or 
“Perlangu’ as Winstedt had read it, when the name “Purna Lango” really means “overwhelming feeling of 
longing for love”. 

The presence of many Kawi words in the Sulalat u’s-Salatin has largely been ignored by many 
recensionists, be they Europrean or Malay transcribers. It is not surprising that the important instruction 
expressed by the Ruler in the Lower Reaches (Yang Dipertuan di Hilir) to the then writer of the Sejarah 
Melayu, which was “that we request a chronicle be composed to address the younger brothers and distant 
relatives of various stations and ranks with soothing words for all Malay Rajas and their ceremonials, for 
remembrance, so that our descendants will hear and learn every word of it” (Bahawa hamba minta 
diperbuatkan hikayat pada hari pituturan segala raja-raja Melayu dengan istiadatnya supaya didengar 
oleh anak cucu kita yang kemudian dari kita dan diketahuinyalah segala perkataan) has been eluded. The 
Kawi words used have been misread and mistranslated by Brown (1952: 12) and misread by others, such 
that the Kawi words “pada hari pituturan” have been misconstrued by several transcribers and editors 
who read or translated them as “to the Bendahara the conversation (“pertuturan”) of the Malay rajas” 


18 


(Muhammad Haji Salleh 1997: 3; A. Samad Ahmad 1986: 3); or “to the Bendahara the rules” (Winstedt 
1938: 42), and “on the day of the conversation” (Abdul Rahman Ismail 2009: 65-66). Brown's reading of 
the words “pada hari” is “bendahari” (Treasury). So, his translation becomes: “It is my wish that the 
Treasury shall make a chronicle setting forth the genealogy of the Malay Rajas and the ceremonials of 
their courts for the information of my descendants who come after me ...” (Brown 1952: 12). 

Another misconception that has come to light is the misreading by most transcribers of the Kawi word 
“pecat’ (which actually means to “unsheath”). The misreading occurs in the sentence that Brown (1952: 
77) translated: “He also gave forty other creeses [sic] to the Raja of Melaka’s suite: the sheaths of all these 
creeses [sic] were broken”. Actually, the author never meant that the sheaths of the krises were broken. 
What he meant was the krises were to be unsheathed from their scabbards. Like most other transcribers, 
Brown had misread and wrongly transcribed the Kawi word “pecat” as “pecah” (“broken”). These are 
only a few examples about the misreading of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin. The presence of several Kawi words 
used by the original author of the Sejarah Melayu that have until now largely been ignored by most 
recensionists have already been pointed out by this writer in his study of the Krusenstern MS of 1798 
(Ahmat Adam 2016: xxxix-xl). 


Iskandar Dhu’]-Qarnayn and Sang Supraba in the Sejarah Melayu 


The Sulalat us-Salatin starts by introducing the character of Iskandar Dhu'l-Qarnayn (lit. “he of the two 
horns’) as ruler of the East and the West, followed by (in some versions) the second narrative of the arrival 
of the mythical Supraba (from Sanskrit “Suprabha”’), which in all versions of the Sejarah Melayu is spelt [ 
svi | (/s/p/r/b/) in Jawi. This word has been misread by transcribers as “Sapurba”, “Sipurba”, “Separba” 
or “Si Parba” for at least two centuries or more. Based on my study of the Krusenstern MS” and after 
having made comparisons with other versions, I am now quite convinced that the word is actually 
“Supraba” which means “very bright or splendid”, “glorious’, or “having a good appearance”. “Supraba’” is 
also another name for the Buddha,” and he is said to be the ninth incarnation of Vishnu, the Hindu god of 
protection. In the Krusenstern MS, his other name is Bichitram (from Sanskrit “Vicitra’'’) and his 
emergence at Bukit Siguntang is accompanied by that of two other princes, Nila Pahlawan and Karna 
Pandeyan (Nila Pandita, Krishna Pandeyan or Karna Pandita in some other versions, all referring to 
Vishnu). All of them claimed descent from Raja Iskandar (Alexander the Great), king of the world. By 
naming these divine personalities as merely individuals, and not identifying them by their religions, it 
clearly shows that the unknown author of the Sulalat us-Salatin had no intention of projecting the prior 
establishment of Buddhism or any of the Vishnavite systems of belief in a Malay region. Therefore, in the 
same line of thinking, the said author also found it convenient to ignore the use of the princely title, 
Parameswara,'° to refer to the first ruler of Melaka. Instead, the prince from Palembang was renamed 
Iskandar Syah. The Persian word “Syah” was affixed to the name, Iskandar, to mean “king”, “sovereign 
prince’, “noble” or “great” (Steingass 2012: 768). So “Iskandar Syah” was actually meant to be a 
translation of the name Alexander the Great. 


The Sejarah Melayu and Islam 


The Sejarah Melayu is silent over the religion of Iskandar. But in every version, there is a chapter on the 
conversion of Méurah Silo of Pasai to Islam after meeting the Prophet Muhammad in a dream. Upon 
becoming a Muslim, Méurah Silo’s name was changed to Sultan Maliku’s-Salih. This episode appeared to 
have inspired the author of the Sejarah Melayu to narrate the story of Raja Kecik Besar [sic], the grandson 
of Iskandar Syah, to succeed his father, Raja Besar Muda. Upon ascending the throne, Raja Kecik Besar (or 
according to the Raffles 18, Raja Tengah), also encountered the Prophet Muhammad in a dream. After his 
conversion, Raja Kecik Besar then adopted the name Sultan Muhammad Syah, whom the author of the 
Sejarah Melayu portrayed as the first Muslim Raja of Melaka. But like his attempt to hide the Sivaist name 


19 


of Parameswara, the author of the Sejarah Melayu had purposely chosen the name “Muhammad Syah’” to 
camouflage the name, Sri Maharaja, (which in Sanskrit means “the lustre of the great king”). The 
historical Sri Maharaja, the nephew of Parameswara, visited China in 1424 and reigned in Melaka until 
1444 or 1445. 


Muhammad Syah converting to Islam: Is it a myth? 


It seems most likely that the story of Sultan Muhammad Syah converting to Islam was just a myth created 
by the author of the Sejarah Melayu from the Hikayat Raja Pasai. The creation of the myth was not merely 
for the purpose of camouflaging the identity of Sri Maharaja (a Hindu epithet), but more so to designate 
the first ruler of Melaka (i.e. Parameswara) as being a converted Muslim himself. 

Similarly, another episode in the Chronicle of Pasai that impressed the author of the Sejarah Melayu 
was the founding of Pasai, which originated from an incident where “Si Pasai”, King Méurah Silo’s 
hunting dog, had at first tried to catch a mousedeer standing on a high ground in the forest facing the 
shore. But upon being challenged by the mousedeer, the dog retreated, but when the dog saw the 
mousedeer turning back, the dog then ran up to it and embraced it about seven times. The king was so 
amazed that he took it as a good omen and decided to build a city in the area. Knowing this story, the 
author of the Sejarah Melayu also created the story of the origin of the name “Melaka’."” 

As the story goes, while Iskandar Syah was hunting one of his hounds was kicked by a white 
mousedeer. He thought that incident of the mousedeer beating a dog was a good sign for him to build a 
city in the area, and so he asked one of the chiefs about the name of the tree that he was standing under. 
When told that it was called the “Melaka” tree he decided to name the city after the tree.’* Nonetheless, the 
meaning of the word “Melaka” has had different interpretations. One interpretation says that "Melaka” is a 
corruption of the Arabic word “malaka” [ 44], which means “to take in possession”, “to take over”, “to 
acquire’, “to seize’, or “to be the owner” (Cowan [Hans Wehr 1991: 1081]). In the Persian language, 
“malakat” [ «4 | also means “possession” (Steingass 2012: 1804). On the other hand, when the word is 
pronounced and spelt “malagat’ [ “+ ] in Persian, it means “meeting” or “encountering”. Those who 
believe in this interpretation forget that around 1399 or 1400, there were no Arabs or Persians in the said 
area. Thus, just as the naming of Melaka after a tree is fictional, the story of Sultan Muhammad Syah in the 
Sejarah Melayu is also very likely to be fictional. Furthermore, there is no record in the Ming Shi-lu that 
Muhammad Syah had come to visit the emperor. Instead it was Sri Maharaja who did so in 1424. But long 
before Sri Maharaja ascended the throne, Islam had already set foot in the kingdom. 

The coming of Islam to Melaka is more reliably told in Ma Huan’s work, Ying- Yai Sheng Lan, which 
was published in 1453. According to Ma Huan, who was a Muslim himself and a translator and 
interpreter for Zheng He,” his first expedition was made with Zheng He's fourth expedition of 1413-15. 
The expedition, which was to visit Champa, Java, Palembang and Melaka, Samudera, Ceylon, Calicut and 
Hormuz, must have arrived in Melaka either in late 1413 or before October 1414, because in his 
description about the country of Melaka, Ma Huan reported that the king of the country of Melaka and the 
people had during that time “all followed the Islamic religion” (J. V. Mills 1970: 110). Ma Huan noted that 
they performed fasting, doing penance (tawba) and daily prayers (salat). Since Parameswara was still 
ruler of Melaka” before September or October 1414, it would be logical to assume that he was the Muslim 
king referred to by Ma Huan. Furthermore, as reported in the Ming Shi-lu of 5 October 1414, Megat 
Iskandar Syah had visited the emperor in Beijing, where he announced the demise of his father, 
Parameswara.”' However, even if one were to hypothesise that Ma Huan’s stay in Melaka was in late 1414 
(for he returned to China in 1415), and that the reigning ruler then was Megat Iskandar Syah, it is still 
logical to assume that Islam had set foot for quite some time in Melaka, most likely towards the end of 
Parameswaras reign.” 

Parameswara must have converted to Islam before he died and took the name (or rather appellation) of 
Muhammad, thus prompting the unknown author of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin to create the myth of Sultan 


20 


Muhammad Syah, a story that was inspired by the conversion of Méurah Silo, who after meeting the 
prophet in a dream had recited the syahadah (the Islamic confession of faith)?” and was subsequently 
asked to adopt the name Sultan Malik u’s-Salih, a title meaning “the pious king”. Regarding the mythical 
name chosen by the author, I agree with Syed Naquib al-Attas (al-Attas 2011: 61) that the name 
“Muhammad”, which may be translated as “highly praised one” (Steingass 2012: 1190), could only be an 
appellation for someone of high disposition, such as a king.”* Thus the author concocted the story of the 
conversion of the first ruler of Melaka to avoid mentioning the name “Parameswara’. It was also precisely 
to demonstrate that the first ruler of Melaka finally became a Muslim with the gelar (appellation) of 
“Muhammad”, and that the name Iskandar Syah or Iskandar Dhu'1l-Qarnayn was consistent with his use of 
the Qur’anic “Dhu'l-Qarnayn” as the founder of the Melaka kingdom. 

By making Iskandar head of the Melaka kingdom, the author established Iskandar Dhu’l-Qarnayn as 
the alter ego of Sang Supraba, Sri Tri Buana, Nila Pahlawan, Bichitram Syah and Sang Nila Utama who 
had all, according to the different versions of the Sejarah Melayu, contributed towards the founding of 
kingdoms such as Minangkabu, Tanjung Pura, Bentan, Tumasik (or Singapura) and eventually, Melaka. 
The author was attempting to show that the genealogical history of the Malay rulers had really begun in 
Palembang, and continued even after Melaka was conquered by the Portuguese. Even so, their genealogy 
continued up to the period of the establishment of Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah’s reign in Johor Lama. 
During this time, a request was made to rewrite the copy of the Sejarah Melayu. 

Just about half a century ago, the late Professor Oliver Wolters had already proposed the theory that the 
genealogical history of the Melaka rulers had taken place continuously without interruption, to the extent 
that the history of Iskandar Syah’s (Parameswara's) sojourn in Singapore was fictionalised in order to 
provide an uninterrupted continuity of his reign from Palembang to Melaka.” To Wolters, Parameswara’s 
departure from Palembang parallels the withdrawal of Sri Tri Buana or Sang Supraba from Palembang to 
“look for the sea’, which eventually led him to Bentan and Tumasik. 

The author also stated that Sang Supraba who also bore the title of “Tramberi*® Tribuana’” (a holy title 
for a prince who ruled over three worlds viz. the heavens, earth and the world under), was in fact lord as 
well as symbol of the Hindu/Buddhist and Vishnavite religions. As a pious Muslim,” the author appeared 
to perceive that Dhu'l-Qarnayn had a similar attribute or powerful status to Tramberi Tribuana. Perhaps 
the author was not unaware of the existence of one hadith that had reportedly stated: “Dhu'l-Qarnayn had 
been visited by an angel who ascended with him through the sky until he could see the whole of the earth 
and the fathomless sea that commands the world” (Seyyed Hussein Nasr: 2017: 756) - which in fact 
echoes the attributes that Tramberi Tribuana possessed. 

Dhw'l-Qarnayn’s name is found in the Holy Quran, and his story of heroism is illuminated further in 
the Hikayat Iskandar Dhu'l-Qarnayn, which the author must have relied on to narrate the story of an 
imagined historical figure, said to have been the great ancestor of the Malay kings. It is also not 
improbable that the said author had used the Hikayat Iskandar Dhu'l-Qarnayn to create the story of Kaid 
Hindi giving his daughter up to be married to Iskandar with the help of the Prophet Khidr, according to 
the ordinance [syariat] of Prophet Abraham. As stated in the narrative, after the wedding, Iskandar took 
the princess along when he set forth for the East. 

For the author, the name “Iskandar” is symbolic of a perfect Muslim. As a matter of fact, most 
commentators of the Qur'an consider Dhul-Qarnayn a righteous king who was nonetheless granted 
miraculous means for conquering the world and was spoken to directly by God (verse 86 of Surah al- 
Kahf). As verified by Surah Al-Kahf in the Holy Qur'an, Dhu'l-Qarnayn is also known as “the man whose 
travels encompassed the east and the west”. To pious Muslims, Hikayat Iskandar Dhu'l-Qarnayn had been 
written because he was considered by some to be a prophet of God. Among students of the Holy Qur'an, 
however, there were those who believed that [Iskandar] Dhul-Qarnayn was a prehistoric king and a 
contemporary of Abraham; even though such a view of the man was more of speculation and legend than 
the real historic person. But to most commentators of the Qur’an, Dhul-Qarnayn was considered to be 
Alexander the Great (Seyyed Hossein Nasr 2017: 756-757). 


21 


Among Muslims, the name Iskandar Dhu’l-Qarnayn evokes several perceptions. One hadith identifies 
him as a youth from Rum (i.e. the western lands) who built the Egyptian city of Alexandria. Some 
Quranic scholars have identified him as the ancient Persian king Cyrus the Great. Some consider him to 
be just a righteous servant of God who had been granted sovereignty over the world along with 
knowledge and wisdom. Others suggest that he is a prophet or an angel. In both Islamic and Quranic 
history, the existence of Iskandar was one of the matters about which the Mekkans had questioned the 
Prophet, upon the advice of some Jewish scholars, whose counsel had been sought in trying to determine 
the truth of Muhammad's prophethood. It was based on this query of the Mekkans that God made the 
revelation through verse 84 of the Surah al-Kahf: “Truly, We established him in the land, and gave him the 
means to all things.’ It was based on this verse that the Persian thinker, al-Razi, explained: “When Dhu'l- 
Qarnayn desired something, he would follow these means to attain it” (ibid.). 

The author’s stand on Islam is clearly seen when he identified “Iskandar Syah” as the first ruler of 
Melaka/last ruler of Singapura. Similarly, he used the name “Suprabha’ as another name for the Buddha to 
avoid mentioning the advent of Buddhism in Palembang and its surrounding areas in the seventh century. 
Besides mentioning the name Sang Supraba (or his alter ego, Bichitram) as just an ordinary individual, 
and giving him the important role in laying the foundation of Malay kinghood with Demang Lebar Daun, 
the author also described the arrival of two other princes who had arrived together with Supraba, 
emphatically pointing out that they were all descendants of Iskandar Dhu1-Qarnayn. 

According to several versions of the Sejarah Melayu, Supraba married the daughter of Demang Lebar 
Daun, named Sundari (meaning “the beautiful one”) and had four children: two daughters called Sri Dewi 
and Candra Dewi, and two sons named Sang Maniaka and Sang Nila Utama. However, according to 
another version of the Sejarah Melayu, upon becoming the ruler of Tumasik, Sang Nila Utama renamed 
the island as Singapura, and took the title Sri Tri Buana. The image of Iskandar Dhul-Qarnayn as the 
founding ancestor of the Malay kings is a symbolic attempt by the author of the Sejarah Melayu to show 
his great role as king of the East and the West in parallel with the role of Sang Supraba who became 
founder of the royal Malay legacy. 

In all versions of the Sejarah Melayu, the author had tried to show without fail that the founding of the 
genealogy of the Melaka rulers began in Palembang. According to the author, this uninterrupted 
genealogical history of the Malay rulers was a result of the exploits of Iskandar Dhu'l-Qarnayn’'s 
descendants, and thus it was Iskandar Syah who was in actual fact the founder of the Melaka sultanate. 
Based on this rationale, the author produced this work which he called “pituturan segala raja-raja” 
(memory-cum-admonition of Rajas). But besides trying to make the rulers remember their history, the 
author also wanted them to reflect on their past and to constantly keep past events in mind as well as to 
take whatever happened as an admonition. The purpose was also to advise them when it was due. Thus, the 
word “pituturan’ clearly indicates that the literary work is actually not fully a book of history, but instead a 
work containing narratives for the rulers to reflect on and to remind them of their past. 

Therefore, an attempt to use the Raffles 18 as a historical source by some local Malaysian scholars back 
in 2015, to back their unsubstantiated claim that Melaka as a polity was founded in 1262, lacks historical 
objectivity and honesty on their part. Not only are these historians unashamed of their embarrassing 
conclusive statement, but this writer has also been told that some of them have even cajoled some quarters 
in the Ministry of Education’s Textbook Bureau to update the old date of 1400 as found in the current 
history textbooks for Malaysian schools. The said claim by the local historians is not based on solid 
research, but rather on a fake assumption, whereby they calculated the reigns of individual rulers of 
Melaka and backtracked them, starting from 1511 when the Sultan of Melaka abandoned his throne after 
the Portuguese invasion. For example, they concluded that Mahmud Syah ruled Melaka for 30 years. But 
the reign of the last Sultan varies between 30 and 32 years, depending on which version of the Sejarah 
Melayu is used. 

Meanwhile, few scholars of Malaysian history have taken heed of the author of the Sejarah Melayu's 
narrative about Sultan Ahmad Syah succeeding his father, Mahmud Syah, just before the Portuguese 


22 


invaded Melaka. This cannot be a myth because not too long ago, Malaysian archaeologists have 
discovered undated tin coins from Sultan Ahmad’s reign. 

The discrepancy in chronological dating brings into doubt the accuracy of the Sejarah Melayu’'s 
information about royal succession. For example, the Raffles 18 claims that the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin 
Ri’ayat Syah was 33 years, when the records of the Ming Shi-lu of 1481 and the Rekidai hoan that was 
dated 1480-1481 state that he only ruled for a period of no more than four years. Sultan Mansur Syah’s 
reign is stated to have lasted 73 years, when his tombstone marked 1477 as the year of his death while his 
ascension to the throne was in 1459, according to the Ming Shi-lu. His predecessor, Sultan Muzaffar Syah 
is said to have ruled for 40 years even though the Chinese records indicate that he ruled Melaka for about 
14 to 15 years.”* As for the fictional Sultan Muhammad (alias Sri Maharaja), his reign was supposedly 57 
years, while most versions state that it was 67 years. Again, this proves the unreliability of the Sejarah 
Melayu’s chronology. Other unsubstantiated dates are the 17-month reign of Raja Ibrahim (nicknamed 
Sultan Abu Syahid), and the two-year rule of Sultan Megat or Raja Kecil Besar, the second ruler of Melaka. 

Thus, if one were to add up the reigns of the different Melaka rulers, the total is 236 years and five 
months - which is indeed rather preposterous. Today, visitors who visit Melaka by road may have noticed 
that there are billboards erected in several places in the state announcing Melaka's age as being more than 
750 years old. This method of calculating the founding date of Melaka was actually not pioneered by these 
few local historians but was first adopted by Francois Valentyn, a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church, 
who served in Ambon in the late seventeenth century. He used a version of the Sejarah Melayu as his 
principal source, most likely the earliest version of the Sejarah Melayu ever read by a European. In that 
version, it was mentioned that the first ruler of Melaka was a royal refugee from Singapura, where he had 
ruled for three years. Based on the information he acquired, Valentyn stated that Iskandar Syah reigned as 
king of Melaka for 22 years.”’ In his book published in 1726, Valentyn claimed that Melaka was founded 
in 1253. This was criticised by C.O. Blagden, who called the finding “hopelessly untenable.” Blagden, 
who wrote “Notes on Malay History” in 1909, had unreservedly dismissed the date of Melaka’s founding 
in the thirteenth century. He suggested its founding date was probably somewhere between 1377 and 
1400 CE. He noted that Palembang was invaded by the Javanese in 1377. Shortly after that, Singapura and 
Ujung Tanah were also conquered by the Javanese. In his criticism of Valentyn’s date, Blagden had already 
pointed out the “absurdly long reigns [of] the Melaka Rajas ... for instance four generations of them, 
from Sultan Muhammad Syah to Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah inclusive, are made to cover a space of 201 
years; which is extremely improbable and next to impossible’ (Blagden 1909: 139). 

Obviously, the claim by the local historians that Melaka was founded in 1262 is naive and very 
embarrassing, if not an insult to credible historians who are committed to writing Malaysian history 
based on historical evidence. One major fault that the local Malay historians committed is that they forgot 
that the Sejarah Melayu is unreliable insofar as chronological dating is concerned. These historians do 
not know when exactly Parameswara left Palembang. The Sejarah Melayu does not provide any 
information regarding this period. 


When did the first ruler of Melaka leave Palembang? 


According to the Ming Shi-lu dated 13 September 1377, following the death of King Da-ma-sha-na-a-zhe 
[Dharmasraya]** (Wolters, 1970: 137), of San-fo-chi (Srivijaya), his son Ma-na-zhe Wu-li (Maharaja Buri) 
succeeded him as ruler of San fo-chi.** Following that, a messenger was sent to China with a request to 
procure a seal from the emperor. But the report about Maharaja Buri being given a letter of recognition by 
China and the royal seal from the Hongwu Emperor was only recorded on 30" November 1377. These 
were delivered by the Chinese envoy, who not surprisingly only arrived in Palembang two to three 
months after the release of the edict. This means that it was only in late 1377 or early 1378 that the envoy 
arrived, and Maharaja Bhuri had by then already occupied the throne. Who was this king? Professor Syed 
Naquib has identified him as Maharaja Puri. He reads the name “Ma-na-zhe Wu-li” in the Ming Shi-lu as 


23 


“Maharaja Puri”*’ (Naquib al-Attas, 2011: 63 & 65). But I think the name is Maharaja Bhuri, meaning the 
“great Maharaja’. The word “Bhuri” in Sanskrit means “mighty”, “great”, “strong”, “important”, 
“abundant” (Monier-Williams 1999: 764). This corresponds with the meaning of the name 
“Parameswara’, which is “king”, “supreme lord”, “relating to or coming from the supreme god (Siva)” 
(Monier-Williams 1999: 620). The possibility of Parameswara having ascended the throne in 1377 or 
1378 makes sense. 

However, according to the Ming Shi-lu dated 18 September 1397, the Hongwu Emperor complained 
that San-fo-chi had failed to send tribute to China. Beijing also accused San-fo-chi of creating discord and 
deceiving the Chinese envoys into going to Palembang. This friction drew the attention of Java 
(Majapahit), which admonished San-fo-chi and forced it to escort the envoys back to China. This implies 
that Majapahit had again invaded San fo-chi. The Chinese record also mentioned that San-fo-chi was 
subject to Java even earlier. In around 1376, it was reported that San-fo-chi was conquered by Java 
(Groeneveldt 1960 [1880]: 69). Based on Tomé Pires’ information, the reason for the attack on Srivijaya 
was Parameswaras action to dissociate himself from Majapahit’s overlordship, and to regard himself as an 
independent monarch. Pires said: “He had changed his name to Mijcura", which according to Pires means 
“to exempt” (Cotesdo 1967: 231).** 

Because of the invasion in 1391-92 (Wolters 1970: 147), Parameswara, who had ruled his realm for 
about 14 years, was compelled to seek asylum in Tumasik. But while sojourning on the island, he was 
alleged to have been involved in the murder of Sang Aji Singapura, who happened to be the son-in-law of 
the King of Siam (Cortesao 1967: 231-232). Parameswara was said to have usurped power and ruled six 
years before he was attacked by the Siamese just before early 1398 (Wolters, 1970: 147). Fleeing Siamese 
vengeance, Parameswara was forced to leave for Muar and later Bertam, in Melaka. 

It seems that the local historians who proposed 1262 as the date for the founding of Melaka did not do 
their research thoroughly. Neither did they read the Malay sources that they used viz. the Sulalat u’s-Salatin 
diligently and critically. Information regarding the reign of the first three rulers of Melaka, retrieved from 
any version of the Sejarah Melayu, has been proven to be incorrect by Professor Wang Gungwu.” Wang 
had unambiguously shown that the first three rulers of Melaka were Parameswara (r. 1403-13/14), Megat 
Iskandar Syah (r. 1413/14-24) and Sri Maharaja (r. 1424-44). Sri Maharaja must have still been on the 
throne of the Melaka sultanate even towards the end of 1444, for on 23 December of that year, the Ming 
Shi-lu reported that Melaka’s envoy by the name of Song-na-di-la-ye (Sunan diraja?) and others who were 
sent by the ruler had come to the Ming Court to offer tribute of horses and local products. But not long 
after that, on 28 March 1445, the Chinese records also mentioned that Melaka had again sent an envoy by 
the name of Mo-Zhe-na who came in order to bring a memorial and to offer tribute of horses and local 
products. Could this be a sign that there was a change of ruler in Melaka, and that the ruler was Ibrahim, 
mentioned by the Sejarah Melayu as having a short reign of 17 months? His very short reign was probably 
the reason why the Ming Shi-lu did not mention his name. Nevertheless, based on the Sejarah Melayu, 
Raja Ibrahim, nicknamed Sultan Abu Syahid (in Arabic, it means” father of the witness” or “father of the 
martyr’) was the fourth ruler of Melaka. 

Meanwhile, the envoy Mo-zhe-na had probably planned to leave China by late April, because the Ming 
Shi-lu of 20 April recorded that his request for silk gauze headwear and ornamental gold and silver belts 
was approved by the Court. However, it seemed that by early May, Mo-zhe-na was still in China, for on 5 
May 1445 it was again reported that Mo-zhe-na had requested “an imperial letter of protection for the 
country as well as ‘mang’ dragon robes and a parasol” be conferred on King Xi-li Ba-mi-xi-wa-er Diu-ba- 
sha (Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah)”, thus implying that another ruler had emerged in Melaka.*° Mo-zhe-na 
and his other colleagues also said that the king of Melaka wished to personally come to the Chinese Court 
because he wanted to bring many people and a great amount of goods. For that they requested a large ship 
be conferred upon the Melaka delegation to facilitate the journey to and fro, which the emperor agreed to 
build. However, no mention of the Melakan ruler’s name is available in any version of the Sejarah 
Melayu. 


24 


Following the report in 1445 on Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah, it was only about ten years later (30 May 
1455) that the Ming Shi-lu reported on Melaka again. In that report, Sultan Wu-da-fo-na Sha (Muzaffar 
Syah) was said to have sent envoys bringing tribute of horses and local products to the Ming Court. The 
report did not say that Muzaffar Syah was the new ruler of Melaka. Since there was no earlier report 
regarding Muzaffar Syah’s acension to the throne, one is left in the dark about Raja Kasim who, according 
to the Sejarah Melayu, succeeded Sultan Abu Syahid and became Sultan Muzaffar Syah. The narrative in 
the Sejarah Melayu only mentions Raja Ibrahim, who, having succeeded Sultan Muhammad Syah [sic], 
was murdered in a palace intrigue. Muzaffar Syah’s name was only mentioned once by the Ming Shi-lu in 
1455, not because he had just succeeded the throne but because he was sending tribute to the Emperor, 
implying that he was already on the throne much earlier under the name of Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah. 
Furthermore, bearing in mind that Raja Kasim had Indian blood on his mother’s side, there was a strong 
likelihood that the title Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah referred to Raja Kasim.*’ 

It seemed that Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah or Raja Kasim later took the royal title, Sultan Muzaffar 
Syah, when he became more established as the Sultan of Melaka. It was during the first decade of his rule 
viz. between 1445 and 1555, that Melakas relations with China were enhanced following his troubles 
with the Siamese. He was in actual fact the fifth ruler of Melaka. The Sejarah Melayu mentions that 
Muzaffar died after having ruled Melaka for 42 years. But since the Chinese records mentioned 
Parameswara Dewa Syah in 1445 and Sultan Wu-ta-fo-na-sha (Muzaffar Syah) in 1455, the period of his 
reign could be calculated from 1445 until the rise of Sultan Mansur Syah in 1458/1459. That would give 
his reign a duration of 13 or 14 years. 

The sixth ruler of Melaka was Sultan Mansur Syah who, before taking over the throne, was known as 
Raja Abdul or Raja Abdullah. He ruled for 18 or 19 years (1458/59-77). His successor was Sultan 
Alauddin Riayat Syah who, according to the Sejarah Melayu, was variously known as Raja Ahmad, Raja 
Husin and Raja Radin. Prior to taking the throne, Sultan ‘Alauddin had two sons: Raja Munawir and Raja 
Zainal; but according to the Sejarah Melayu also, by his marriage with Tun Naja (daughter of Seri Nara 
Diraja Tun Ali), he fathered Raja Hitam, Raja Muhammad and Raja Fatimah. Raja Munawir was the 
eldest, followed by Raja Muhammad and then Raja Zainal. 

In the opinion of this writer, however, the life background of ‘Alauddin is very obscure. Although the 
Sejarah Melayu paints him as a great peacekeeping Sultan, having nocturnal confrontations with thieves 
in the suburbs of Melaka town, the report given by the Rekidai hoan’* tells a more lacklustre story. 
‘Alauddin was only six years old when he sent a dispatch to the “King of the Country of Ryukyu” in 1480 
(Kobata & Matsuda 1969: 116-118). The said letter was written by someone who signed off with the 
words “on behalf of the king”; but Kobata and Matsuda assumed that it was the Laksamana (Admiral) of 
Melaka who wrote on the Sultan's behalf. Perhaps Kobata got this impression based on the second letter 
from Melaka, dated 11 April 1480 which clearly stated that it was written and signed by the “Lo-tso-ma- 
na’ of Melaka (ibid.: 119-120). However, one may question the validity of the statement in the first 1480 
letter. If Alauddin was really only six years old in 1480, then he must have ascended the throne as the 
seventh Sultan of Melaka when he was only three, following his father’s death in 1477. 

This writer suspects that there might have been a mistake in the translation or transliteration of the 
original Jawi letter into Chinese. Instead of writing “enam belas” (sixteen) the translator might have read 
and transcribed it as “enam’” (six) which makes it rather ridiculous to think that ‘Alauddin became Sultan 
after his father’s death at the puerile age of three. However, even if one were to assume that the information 
in document no. 9, volume XXXIX of the Rekidai hoan is correct, Alauddin was a father of several 
children when he was only seven in 1481. Therefore, it would be more logical to consider that ‘Alauddin 
was already sixteen years old in 1480. That he was no longer a Sultan in late 1481 is evidenced by the 
Ming Shi-lu’s report on 23 August 1481, mentioning the emperor “having sent his envoys Lin Rong and 
his deputy, Huan Qiang-heng, with the mission to proceed and enfeoff Ma-ha-mu Sha, the son of Sudan 
Man-su Sha” as Sultan. The said envoys, however, did not reach Melaka, for their ship had sunk. On 24 
June 1484, the Ming Shi-lu again reported that Zang Sheng was sent to Melaka as chief envoy, together 


25 


with Zuo Fu as his deputy, with the same purpose. The Chinese records imply that Sultan ‘Alauddin only 
ruled Melaka for four years and not thirty-three years, as claimed by the copyist of the Raffles 18. 

The eighth ruler was Sultan Mahmud Syah who, before ascending the throne, was named Muhammad, 
or shortened to Mamad. But he vacated his throne to make way for Ahmad Syah shortly before the 
Portuguese landed in 1511. In all the complete versions of the Sejarah Melayu, Mahmud Syah was Sultan 
of Melaka until early 1511 or late 1510. He abdicated just before Afonso Dalboquerque invaded the 
sultanate. According to the Sejarah Melayu, it was Sultan Ahmad Syah who literally led the battle against 
the Portuguese. The author described the fight between the Melaka Malays and the Portuguese led by 
Dalboquerque in great detail, even though the Portuguese sources never mentioned Sultan Ahmad’s 
name. But it appeared that Sultan Ahmad did succeed his father as Sultan of Melaka, as was proven when 
archaeologists discovered two tin coins bearing the inscription “Sultan Ahmad ibn Mahmud Syah”. 

To sum up, most versions of the Sejarah Melayu have listed a total of nine rulers who sat on the throne 
of the Melaka sultanate; but there are also other versions that listed ten rulers of Melaka. The list of nine 
rulers are: 


1. Iskandar Syah 

2. Raja Kecil Besar (Sultan Megat) 

3. Raja Tengah (lit. “the middle prince’, alias Sultan Muhammad Syah) 
4. Raja Ibrahim (r. 17 months) 

5. Raja Kasim (Sultan Muzaffar Syah) 

6. Sultan Abdul or Raja Abdullah (Sultan Mansur Syah) 

7. Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah 

8. Sultan Mahmud Syah, and 

9. Sultan Ahmad Syah. 


On the other hand, the Krusenstern MS and several other versions supposedly written by Tun Seri Lanang 
give a list of ten rulers: 


1. Iskandar Syah 
2. Raja Besar Muda (lit. “junior chief prince”) 
3. Raja Tengah 
4. Raja Kecik Besar (lit. “elder junior prince’, alias Sultan Muhammad Syah) 
5. Raja Ibrahim (Sultan Abu Syahid, who only ruled for one year and five months) 
6. Raja Kasim (Sultan Muzaffar Syah) 
7. Raja Abdullah (Sultan Mansur Syah) 
8. Raja Husin (Sultan Alauddin Riayat Syah) 
9. Raja Mamat or Mamad (Sultan Mahmud Syah), and 
10. Sultan Ahmad Syah (r. starting in late 1510 or early 1511) 
However, the names and lengths of reign of the Melaka rulers, as elicited from the Chinese sources, are: 
1. Ba-li-mi-su-la [Parameswara] (r. 1403-13/14): 10/11 years. 
2. Mu-gan Sa-yu-di-er Sha [Megat Iskandar Syah] (r. 1414-23/24): 9/10 years 
3. Xi-li-Maha la-zhe [Sri Maharaja] (1. 1424-44/45): 20/21 years 


4. Xi-li Ba-mi-xi-wa-er Diu-ba-sha [Seri Parameswara Dewa Syah / alias Raja Kasim, later Wo-da-fo- 
na Sha (Muzaffar Syah) (r. 1444/45-58/59): 14/15 years 


26 


5. Su-dan-Mang-su Sha [Sultan Mansur Syah] (1. 1458/59-77): 18/19 years, and 
6. Ma-ha-mu Sha [Sultan Mahmud Syah] (r. 1481-11): 30 years 


' According to a survey by Raimy Che-Ross, there are altogether 44 manuscripts (both complete and incomplete) of the Sejarah 
Melayu in various libraries in Europe, New Zealand as well as in Malaysia and Indonesia. See Raimy Che-Ross, “Malay 
Manuscripts in New Zealand”, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (2002 [75], 2: 30). 

* This version of the Sulalat us-Salatin has been intensely studied and edited or translated by scholars since the early nineteenth 
century. They include Sir Richard Winstedt (1934), C. C. Brown (1952), Muhammad Haji Salleh (1997) and Abdul Rahman 
Ismail (2009). 

> “Pasar” in Old Javanese can also mean “cemetery.” 

*R. Roolvink, “The Variant Versions of the Malay Annals, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 123 (1967), no. 309 

° This copy has only 16 chapters ending with the story of Sultan Mansur Syah moving to another palace after the killing of Hang 
Kesturi. 

° Ludang is a Kawi word meaning to “finish”, “complete” or “to put an end to” (Zoetmulder 2000 [1]: 610). 

” See R. O. Winstedt, “The Date, Author and Identity of the Original Draft of the Malay Annals” in Journal of the Malayan 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (1938 [16], 3: 27). 

’ The version read by Frangois Valentyn, minister of the Dutch Reformed Church in Ambon in the late seventeenth century 
could, however, be an earlier copy, though not nessarily an original copy or version. 

° This writer is very grateful to Dr Geofrey Wade for having taken the arduous task of translating and editing the documents 
called Ming Shi-lu which undoubtedly have benefitted countless scholars and researchers of the history of Southeast Asia. 
The Chinese sources on the early history of Melaka in this paper have been mainly taken from Geoffrey Wade, (ed.)(2005), 
Southeast Asia in the Ming Shi-lu: An Open Access Resource (www.epress.nus.edu.sg). 

'° Nevertheless, in several versions of the Sulalat us-Salatin that contain the name Tun Seri Lanang, the name Sultan Mughayat 
Syah is used despite this being a misreading of the Jawi spelling for “Maiyat Syah”. The word “ma’iyat” in Persian means “co- 
existence’, “favour’, “affection”; whereas “mughayat’ does not have any meaning (Steingass 2012: 1277). 

'' Timothy J. Moy, “The Sejarah Melayu Tradition of Power and Political Order: A Study in Political Legitimation’, M.A. Thesis, 
History Department, University of Malaya, 1976/77: 20. 

Rightly called by the Malay name “kesusasteraan Sejarah” by Teuku Iskandar, the Sejarah Melayu has a role to play in its 
function as a work of literature viz. to remind the Malay rulers of their principal duty of maintaining justice and fair play 
during their reigns. 

'? See Sulalat us-Salatin (transliterated and edited with an introduction by Ahmat Adam), Yayasan Karyawan, Kuala Lumpur, 
1966. 

'* Incidentally, a Buddha statue was found in Bukit Siguntang, and in the opinion of F. M. Schnitger it probably dates back to the 
sixth century CE. Nik Hassan, a Malaysian archaeologist, however, estimates that it might have been sculpted between the 
late seventh century and early eighth century instead. See Nik Hassan Shuhaimi, “The Bukit Seguntang Buddha: A 
Reconsideration of Its Date’, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (1979 (52) 2: 38-39). 

'° “Vicitra” (from the Sanskrit “Vichitra”) means “variegated”, “many-coloured”, “brilliant”, “charming”, “beautiful” (Monier- 

Williams 1999: 959). It carries the same meaning as “Supraba’. 

Parameswara” (of Sanskrit origin) means “Supreme Lord” (Maharaja) or “Mahadewa’ (especially referring to the name of 

Siwa). Zoetmulder (2000 (2): 768-769). It is also the name of Visnu or Siva or Indra, Supreme Being or God; or any eminent 

prince. See Monier-Williams (1999: 588). 

'7 “Malaka” in Sanskrit denotes an “arbour” (i. e. a shady garden alcove with the sides and roof formed by trees or climbing 
plants trained over a framework), “bower” or “patio”. It is also the name of various plants. However, it can also mean “a 
wood near a village” (Monier-Williams 1999: 813). There is no Sanskrit word that uses “Melaka” as the name of a tree. 

'S According to the Forest Research Institute of Malaysia's website, the tree is also known as the Indian gooseberry tree. Its 
scientific name is Phyllanthus emblica. However, the word “malaka” or “malakka” in Sanskrit does not indicate that it refers 
to a tree. See the preceding footnote. 

Zheng He first arrived in Melaka on his third expedition in 1410 at a place called “Five Islands’, bringing with him the Ming 
Emperor's imperial edicts with a mission to bestow upon the chief of that place two silver seals, a girdle and a robe. 
Following his visit, the town was raised to the status of “cheng”, meaning “city”. The place then became the country of Man- 
la-chia (Melaka).The chief, after having received the favour of being made king, then decided to visit the Emperor in 1411, 
bringing along his wife and son, in order to give his thanks and to present tribute of local products (J.V.G. Mills 1970: 108). 
According to the Ming Shih-lu, however, in 1405 the emperor appointed the chief as king. 

* On 20 September 1413, the Ming Shi-lu reported that Parameswara had sent his nephew to head the delegation to Beijing to 
offer tribute of local products, which means that he was still alive. 

*! Until today, historians studying the history of early Melaka relied so much on Tome Pires’ account of Parameswara’ life. Pires 
acquired his source of information from the Javanese. According to Pires, following Parameswara’s death, his son Xaquem 
Darxa (Megat Iskandar Syah) succeeded him and became a Muslim at the age of seventy-two after the ruler of Pasai agreed 
to send merchants to trade in Melaka. Pires’ account says that Megat Iskandar Syah married the daughter of the king of Pasai 
at that same age (Cortesa6 1967: 241-242). He also said when Xaquem Darxa expressed his desire to go to China, he was 
already forty-five years old. Pires must have mixed up the name of Megat Iskandar Syah with the name of his father Iskandar 
Syah (Parameswara). According to the Ming Shi-lu, Megat Iskandar Syah came to the Ming Court in 1414 and was succeeded 
by Sri Maharaja in 1424. Therefore, he could not have been more than fifty-five years of age when he died. Therefore, the 
seventy-two-year-old Raja must have been Parameswara instead. Pires’ account is not reliable as his information is not 


16 << 


Zt 


backed by any contemporary source. 

2 Tan Ta Sen believes that Megat Iskandar Syah became a Muslim after having married the princess of Pasai in 1413, which 
unfortunately is not backed by any other evidence except for Pires. His other argument that the name Megat Iskandar Syah 
indicates that he had converted to Islam is not necessarily correct. 

* The syahadah is called the Islamic creed; it is the soul, the core and foundation of all percepts of Islam. Commonly called the 
syahadatain, it consists of two sentences in Arabic which, when translated, means: “I testify that there is no God but Allah; 
and I testify that Muhammad is the messenger of God”. 

* However, al-Attas (2011: 61) is wrong when he claims that “Muhammad” was a personal name, because it was only an 
appellation. 

» O. W. Wolters, The Fall of Srivijaya in Malay History, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1970: passim. 

© “Tramberi” is a combination of the two Kawi syllables: “tram” and “brih”. While “tram” is a mystical syllable, “brih” is called 
the sacred syllable. “Tramberi” refers to the Hindu sacred title of Sri Tri Buana (Zoetmulder 2000: [2]: 1271 and 1274; and 
[1]: 135). 

*” The author's piety is expressed in the doxology found in several versions of the Sulalat us-Salatin where he reiterated the 
message that one should only discuss the magnificence of God. Further, he also said, “Do not even think of the Essence of 
Allah” (Ahmat Adam 2016: 7). 

*8 All other versions of the Sejarah Melayu mention that he ruled for 42 years. 

° See D. F. A. Harvey, “Valentyn’s Description of Malacca’, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society no. 13 (June 
1884: 67). 

* See C. O. Blagden, “Notes on Malay History’, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society no. 53, September 1909: 
139. 

*! The Sanskrit word “dharma” means “virtue”, “morality”, “good works”; whereas “sraya” in Sanskrit means approaching for 
“protection’, “refuge”, “shelter”; “possessing anything, furnished or provided with, reliance or abode for shelter” (Monier- 
Williams 1900: 510 and 1096). 

* See Geoff Wade (trans.) 2005 entry 1887, 13 Sept. 1377. 

*> Naquib al-Attas wrongly transliterates the name as “Puri”. “Puri” in Kawi means “palace”; the king’s residence (Zoetmulder 
2000: 884); whereas “Buri”, besides meaning “powerful” or “great”, can also mean the name of Brahma, Vishnu, or Siva. 
Monier- Williams (1999: 764). 

* This is only an assumption by Pires. The word could not be “Mijcura” as there is no such word in Sanskrit or Malay. 
“Mahesvara’, however means “great lord”, “sovereign”, or “chief” in Sanskrit. (Monier-Williams 1999: 802). 

* See Wang Gungwu, “The First Three Rulers of Melaka’, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 41, no. 1 
(July 1968: 11-22). 

*° It was quite possible that before he left China, a messenger was sent from Melaka to inform Mo-zhe-na about the latest 
development, viz. regarding the succession to the throne by Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah. 

*” Raja Kasim’s mother was Tun Ute, daughter of the Indian-born Mani Purindan with his Melaka wife, Tun Ratna Sundari, 
daughter of Tun Sri Nara Adiraja. See Ahmat Adam (2016: 113). 

** Translated as “Precious Documents of Successive Generations” the Rekidai hoan was entirely written in Chinese, but has been 
translated into English by two Japanese scholars, Professors Atsushi Kobata and Mitsugu Matsuda. 


28 


The “Krusenstern Manuscript” of the Sulalat u’s- 
Salatin 


Introduction 


Most of us are quite familiar with the version of this manuscript (erroneously called the Malay Annals in 
English) often referred to as the Raffles 18. The Sejarah Melayu was first translated into English by John 
Leyden in 1810 but only published in 1821 by Stamford Raffles, long after Leyden’s death. C.C. Brown 
(1952) also translated the Raffles 18 based on Winstedt’s transliteration (1938); both were published by 
the Malayan (now Malaysian) Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society (MBRAS). In 1995, the MBRAS again 
published the transliteration of the Raffles 18 - this time by Abdul Rahman Ismail. 

Unknown to many scholars and students of the Malay Annals outside Russia, there is another 
manuscript currently kept in the Oriental archives of the Russian Academy of Sciences at Saint 
Petersburg. The MS (comprising of 30 narratives) had however been studied and published in the Russian 
language by Dr E. V. Revunenkova in 2008. The title of her work in English is “Sulalatus-Salatin: 
Krusenstern’s Malay Manuscript, its Cultural and Historical Value”. In 2016, a facsimile of the 
Krusenstern MS was published by Yayasan Karyawan with my transliteration. It took me five years to 
produce the latest critical recension of the manuscript, together with annotations. In the published work I 
have also provided an Introduction as a background to the study. 

The Krusenstern MS contains two parts. The first part consists of 116 folios and the second has 86. The 
manuscript was written on Amsterdam-made paper watermarked “1794”. The size of each folio is 26.5 cm 
x 20 cm. The text’s measurement is 19 x 13.5 cm. But the sizes of the last two folios of the first part of the 
text are 10 x 9 cm each. The last two folios of the second part of the text measure 13 x 8 cm each. Like all 
Malay manuscripts, no title page is given. But unlike most other Malay manuscripts, the names of the 
copyists are given at the beginning of Narrative 13: Haji Muhammad Tahir al-Jawi (whose name indicates 
that he was Javanese), Muhammad Zakat Long and Ibrahim Jamrut (from the Persian “zumurrud” 
meaning “emerald”) (Steingasss 2012: 621). While some parts of the manuscript are written in beautiful 
Nasta'liq script, there are also parts which are difficult to read. 


Who was Krusenstern? 


The man who was the original owner of the manuscript was a Russian naval officer of German descent 
named Adam Johann Ritter von Krusenstern. Sometime in the middle of 1798, he left Penang for Melaka. 
This was just three years after the Dutch-controlled port town was ceded to the British East India 
Company. Krusenstern’s purpose of going to Melaka was to recuperate from an illness. During his short 
stay, he came to know of the existence of the famous Malay literary work, the Sulalat us-Salatin. Being 
curious, while also having an interest in the matter, he engaged three men, one most likely Javanese, to 
transliterate a copy of the said work that same year. For their work, they were paid a sum of 36 doits (31 % 
cent-guilders) for each day (8 doits was equal to 10 cents). 

Upon his return to Russia, von Krusenstern gave the manuscript as a gift to his friend, Schubert, of the 
Science Academy at Saint Petersburg, who in turn gave it to the library of the Asiatic Museum of the 
academy in 1802. However, the existence of the MS was not recorded until 1819, when it was listed in the 
museums collection by someone named Fren. In spite of that, the manuscript remained a mystery for over 
two centuries, until 2008 when a study of this particular “Malay Annals” was done by Dr Revunenkova, 
who had it published in Russian in Saint Petersburg. 

The study which I have undertaken is based on the Jawi facsimile found in Dr Revuneknkova’s book. 


29 


Through the assistance of the Russian scholar, Dr Victor Pogadaev, I understood the gist of Dr 
Revunenkova's writings. 

Unlike the popular Raffles 18, which was copied in 1812, the copyists of the Krusenstern MS had 
studiously copied the Jawi text in such a way that even though many of the words found in the Raffles 18 
had been unintelligible to many scholars and researchers for so long, I was lucky to be able to decipher 
many of them, despite the conspicuous absence of Arabic vowels. However, my decision to approach the 
study through using the philological method paid off, as seen below. 


The presence of Kawi words 


By undertaking the philological approach and by comparing the text of the Krusenstern MS with the 
Raffles 18, I was able to decipher the Kawi and Sanskrit words. In previous studies of the Malay Annals, 
the presence of a large vocabulary of Old Javanese and Sanskrit words has never been recognised by 
almost all scholars, and this was essentially the main weakness of their work. 

The presence of Kawi in the Malay Annals is not to be taken lightly. It was the language of the pre- 
Majapahit era, used in the kakawin (poetry) of the Ramayana and Arjunawiwaha (eleventh century CE). It 
is worth remembering that the existence of written Old Javanese has been proven by the Sukabumi 
inscription of 804 CE. 

Although the spoken language of the Majapahit era (from 1293 CE) was Middle Javanese, Kawi 
continued to be used as language of literature, and this also had an influence on Malay literature as shown 
in early works, namely the Hikayat Seri Rama, Sulalat u’s-Salatin and the Hikayat Hang Tuha. 


The influence of Javanese on Malay 


New Javanese emerged following the collapse of the Majapahit kingdom in 1527. But since the fourteenth 
century, the influence of the Javanese language on the Malay language has been quite extensive; 
unfortunately, little recognition has been given to it. Even the Terengganu inscription (dated 1308 CE) 
has numerous words of Javanese and Sanskrit origins, thus reflecting this influence. As a matter of fact, 
Sanskrit words most likely became a large influence on Malay through the spread of Kawi. 

In my study of the Krusenstern MS, I found that apart from Kawi, quite a number of other foreign 
words, especially Persian, Arabic and Sundanese and of course Sanskrit, could also be found in the Sulalat 
us-Salatin. Such foreign words could complicate translations. From the time of John Leyden (1810) until 
recently, all transcribers of Narrative 1, which discussed the marriage of Iskandar Dhu'l-Qarnayn with the 
Indian princess, had read the name of the princess's father as “Kida Hindi” instead of “Kaid Hindi”, the 
Persian word meaning “ruler” or “governor”. 


Examples of foreign words 


The following words have been found in the Krusenstern MS: ahmak (Arabic for “dull-witted” or “of 
little understanding”); alay, (Arabic for “until”) ambeu (Sundanese for “surprise’), derji (Persian for 
“tailor”), fadihat (Arabic for “fault”), faniya (Arabic for “to pass away’), jawon (Persian for “youth’), 
jogan (Persian for “royal ensign”), kala (Persian for “silk cloth’), khuluk (Arabic for “firm character”), 
Méurah (Acehnese for “title of nobility”), nafiri (Persian for “trumpet”), zihin (Arabic for “mind”), waad 
(Arabic for “contract”), utus or utoih (Acehnese for “craftsman”), tuhfat (Arabic for “gift”), Bra Cau (a 
Siamese title), Po (Champa for “chieftain), sarhad (Persian for “frontier”), and jereun (Acehnese for 
“shrub” ). 


Jawi script without vowels 


Since the early nineteenth century, due to the absence of Arabic vowels in the Malay Jawi script, many 


30 


words have been misread and therefore wrongly transliterated by previous scholars. For example, words 
like Suprab(h)a, benua Kalinga, Bhuta or Bota (demon), Oya Deco (Siamese noble) and Bo Banya 
(Siamese king) have been wrongly read as “Sapurba’, “benua Keling”, “Bat, “Awi Dicu” and “Bubunnya” 
respectively. 

Due to the misreading of Sanskrit and Kawi words, the meanings of names of such characters as 
Bicitram, Suprab(h)a, Nila Pahlawan, Krishna Pandayan, Wan Malini, Wan Empu, and Wan Sundari 
have become distorted, and their significance has never been well-explained. While “Suprabha” renders 
the meaning “glorious light”, it is also another name for the Buddha. Malini (lit. the garland maker) was in 
fact a disciple of the Buddha. 

Wan Sundari (meaning “the beautiful woman”) is also another of the Buddha's disciples, while in the 
Malay Annals she is said to be the daughter of Demang Lebar Daun. In comparison, Wan Empu 
represents the honourable indigenous lady who was symbolically converted to Buddhism when she 
married Suprab(h)a. 

As for the word “Wan” (from Kawi Hwan), it means “one who is a peasant”. It does not refer to the title 
for someone who is a descendant of high rank. Heretofore, in previous studies of the Malay Annals, the 
word “Suprab(h)a” had been transliterated and read as “Sapurba” or “Sepurba’, and “adiraja” 
transliterated and read as “aldiraja” both of which do not carry any meaning. The Muslim author of the 
Malay Annals avoided saying that the Malays became Buddhists and Hindus. And so “Suprabha’, “Karna 
Pandayan” (the wise Krishna) and “Nila Pahlawan” (also representing Vishnu) are instead mentioned 
merely as individuals (see Chapter Two). 

In my study, I have argued that the Sejarah Melayu was written in stages - possibly from an oral 
source. It was first written during the reign of Sri Maharaja (r. 1423/4-44/5) and during the rule of 
Muzaffar Syah (1. 1444/5-58/9), Mansur Syah (r. 1458/9-77) and until the period of the first Alauddin 
Riayat Syah of Johor (r. 1528-64). It was probably also during this period that the Persian Nasta'liq script 
was first used and syncretic sufism (divination and astrology) found its way in the Annals. 

The subtitle of the book, “yakni pertuturan [sic, pituturan] segala raja-raja” (i.e. memory, recollection 
and reminder to all rulers), clearly expressed the noble purpose of the author to counsel future Malay 
rulers by reminding them of their responsibilities as Rajas and the calamities that would befall them if the 
bipartisan contract between Demang Lebar Daun and Sang Supraba was ignored. For centuries, the Kawi 
word “pituturan” has been misread as either “pertuturan” or “peraturan’ both by the Orientalists as well 
as local (Malay and Indian Muslim) transliterators, but its true meaning can be discerned from the 
narratives that run through the text. The narratives are intended as a recollection or a reminder for the 
Malay Rajas. 

By narrating the duel by keris between Laksamana Hang Tuha and Hang Kesturi, the author shows his 
primary intention to remind his readers of the importance of the doctrinal curse (sumpahan) that was 
inscribed on the Kota Kapur (686 CE) inscription and the Sibokingking inscription at Telaga Batu (in the 
seventh century CE) regarding the consequences of disloyalty to authority (drohaka), in particular the act 
of treason against the king. 

My recension attempts to show where the previous transcribers have erred in their transliteration from 
Jawi to Rumi. The Kawi word “kunjak/gonjak” (meaning “to jest”) for example, has been misread by all 
transcribers. Abdul Rahman Ismail read and transliterated it as “goncang” (to shake); Winstedt read it as 
“berguncang’ (excitation); Shellabear read it: “perkejut” (to stiffen with fear, terrify) and Muhammad Haji 
Salleh: read it as “kencanglah” (to be strong or tensed). 

Errors in transliterations were probably started by transliterators such as Leyden (1807-1810), Braddel 
(1851), Shellabear (1896) and Winstedt (1935). Some local Indian Muslims transliterators who were 
employed by the Europeans also contributed towards the misreadings. Later editors such as Situmorang 
and Teeuw (1952), Abdul Samad Ahmad (1979), A. Rahman Ismail (1998) and Muhammad Haji Salleh 
(1997) also did not venture to rectify the mistakes. 

For ages, readers reading the Rumi texts of the Sejarah Melayu have been told that the reading of the 


31 


Jawi spelling [ #5) (1/k/ y/w) (the name of one of Hang Tuha’s companions) is “Lekiyu”. I say it should be 
read as “Lukewa” (from Old Javanese “lukai” or “luke” to mean a particular kind of chopping knife or a 
sickle). Likewise, /t/w/h/ [ °# ] is not “Tuah” but “Tuha”. “Hang Tuha” literally means the 
“accomplished” leader, since Tuha means “leader” as well as “old”. It is worth noting that the word “tuah” 
(luck or fortune) did not exist before the 1630s when the “Hikayat Aceh” was composed. Neither did the 
word “tua” (old). 


Misreading of “Tuah” instead of “Tuha” 


All “names” of major chiefs in the Malay Annals are actually titles or merely nicknames. This is because of 
name taboos which prohibit the naming of the chiefs; we return again to the Laksamana, since “Hang 
Tuha” was never his real name. Since the word “Tuah” did not exist before the 1630s, the Jawi spelling 
/t/w/h cannot be “Tuah”. It is a misread word, perhaps started by Europeans after Valentyn translated 
“Hang Toeha” to “Hang Toea”. For Europeans, the word “tua” (old, ancient, or deep in colour) would be 
much easier to pronounce if the spelling of the word ended with the consonant /h/ as in /t/o/o/a/h/. 

Mistakes in pronunciation and reading could also be seen in the reading of the name “Raja Cangka 
Anak” (a Champa title). It has been wrongly read as “Raja Jakanak” (Winstedt), “Jaknaka” (Shellabear), 
and “Jaka Anak’ (A. Rahman Ismail). The Kawi word “cangka” means “self confident” or “bold”. 
Similarly, the name “Raden Purna Lango’ has been transliterated as “Radin Perlangu” (Winstedt, A. 
Rahman Ismail), and also read as “Kirana Langu” (Shellabear). “Lango” means “being entranced by love” 
in Kawi, whereas “Langu” means “having a sickening smell”, or “revolting”. Clearly the word should be 
“Lango”. 

Due to several interpolations made by copyists and editors, almost every copyist, not excluding the 
ones who worked on the Raffles 18, and also all manuscripts attributed to “Tun Seri Lanang”, have read 
and transliterated the Kawi word “pertuturan” [sic, pituturan] (“reflection’, “memory”) as either 
“peraturan” (“regulations’) or “peturunan” (“descent”) or “perturan” (an unrecognisable word). 
Muhammad Haji Salleh has even read it as “pértéturan” instead of “pertuturan”. The confusion comes 
from the fact that the use of vowels in writing certain words in the Jawi script is not always necessary. 

In the Krusenstern MS, the narratives of the mythical marriages of Sultan Mansur Syah to Raden Ayu 
Candra Kirana and Princess Hang Li Po are found in Narratives 11 and 12 respectively. The purpose of 
the myths are primarily to demonstrate the grandeur of Malaka and its ruler, Sultan Mansur Syah (r. 
1458/9-77). The royal visit to Majapahit (Narrative 11) is also intended as an illustration of Melaka’ 
greatness vis-a-vis Javanese Majapahit. As I have argued elsewhere, this visit never even took place. 

Similarly, the narrative about Mansur Syahs fictional marriage to Hang Li Po is symbolic in order to 
show the greatness of the Melaka ruler vis-a-vis the Emperor of China. Needless to say, this marriage never 
took place. However, if one were to accept without question Tomé Pires’ account of the marriage of a 
Melaka Raja to a Chinese damsel, such as the marriage of (Megat) Iskandar Syah (Parameswaras son) to 
the daughter of a Chinese captain who accompanied the Raja on his return to Melaka from China, one 
might assume that the narrative could have inspired the original author of the Sejarah Melayu to narrate 
the myth of Sultan Mansur Syah marrying a Chinese princess by the name of Hang Li Po. Likewise, the 
story about the Chinese emperor having to drink the water used to wash Mansur’s feet in order to cure his 
skin disease is also an absolute myth. Neither did the marriage with Galuh Candra Kirana (a character 
taken from the Panji Tales) ever happen. 

The Malay Annals was supposed to have been written or copied again on 12 Rabiul-awal (the third 
month) 1021 AH (which is equivalent to Sunday, 13 May 1612 CE). The Krusenstern MS was copied from 
the manuscript written by the Johor Bendahara Paduka Raja, who was exiled to Aceh after Batu Sawar 
was sacked by the Acehnese Sultan Iskandar Muda in mid-1613. The date, 12 Rabiul-awal (regardless of 
the Hegira year) has been adopted by every version of the Sejarah Melayu because it is the common belief 
among Muslims that this is also the birthdate of the Prophet Muhammad. The first Acehnese manuscript 


32 


replaced Sunday with Thursday, which was dated 12 Rabiul-awal 1022 AH (or 2 May 1613 CE). But it was 
recopied some time during the reign of Sultanah Tajul ‘Alam (r. 1641-75), perhaps in the 1660s. The 
district system called Sagoe [Sagi] was introduced in Aceh during this period. The “Datuk Sogoh” (sic, 
Sagoe) mentioned in the Sejarah Melayu was the chief of one of “three sagis”. 


The Acehnese copy of the Malay Annals 


Bendahara Paduka Raja revised the Annals when Sultan Abdullah Mughayat [sic] Syah was installed by 
Iskandar Muda as ruler of Johor towards the end of 1613. The proof that the Malay Annals was recopied in 
Aceh is the presence of several Acehnese words in the Krusenstern MS. Examples of such words are: 
“goga’ (“tumult; noise”); Orang Kaya (“the Chief of”) Sogoh [sic, “Sagoe”]; “datuk si keudé” (an 
Acehnese title; “keude” meaning “shop’); “utus [utoih]” (meaning “craftsmen”; “builders”); panglima 


banda (an Acehnese title); silo (“dazzled by glare”), “pincok” (“fruit salad”), and “surung/srong” (“to 
bribe”). 


The authorship of the “Sejarah Melayu” 


After the death of the Bendahara Paduka Raja, the Sejarah Melayu was again copied by an unknown 
person who inserted the name of “Tun Seri Lanang” and his family tree. “Lanang” means “man” in Kawi. 
Many past researchers claimed that his name was “Tun Mahmud” [ *# ] (“Mahmud” means the praised 
one) and nicknamed “Tun Seri Lanang” (the splendid gentleman), Paduka Raja gelar (titled) 
Bendahara’. In another version of the Annals his name was said to be Muhammad (“praiseworthy”). In 
another, he was called Hamid (“meaning praising, or one who praises’). 


Was Tun Seri Lanang the author of the Malay Annals? 


In the writing tradition of maritime Southeast Asia (before the eighteenth century) no native author (or 
copyist) would ever mention his name in his work. This was due to the practice of observing the name 
taboo, which means that one’s personal name must never be revealed. For example, the author of the 
Javanese text Nagarakrtagama (written in 1365) only used his pseudonym, “Prapanca” (meaning 
“mistaken”; “confused mind”). “Tun Seri Lanang”, whose name was said to be Muhammad, Mahmud, or 
Hamid (all meaning “the praised one” or “the one who praises”) might also be a pseudonym. He was not 
the author, but one of many copyists who re-copied the Sulalat u’s-Salatin. In fact, the 1798 manuscript 
that was copied in Melaka became the first Malay manuscript bearing the names of the copyists. 


What is unique about the study of the Krusenstern MS? 


For the first time, the copyists attempted to make a complete transliteration and translation in Malay of the 
“Chiri’ or “Ciri” (an invocation used as testimony, evidence, mark or sign) that was recited by the demon 
(raksasa), Bhuta (or Bhota), on the occasion of the inauguration of “Bicitram Syah” as “Sang Suprab(h)a’. 
Apart from the Ciri, I have also transliterated the Javanese poem for singing called kidung (or tembang) 
and translated it into Malay. The clarification of certain terms in the poem and their significance has also 
been made for the first time. Below is my transliteration of the Ciri: 


Ho there! Peace and tranquility be to His Majesty Sri Maharaja, whose fame pervades the seven realms of 
the land of gold, whose might is by the power of his hand. Being in possession of the crown adorned with the 
serpent, his fame in war reaches the three kingdoms in the nine realms. He is quick in action, he moves 
speedily with his steed into the forest of lofty trees, combatting and attacking with full valour. He sits in state 
on the lion throne in the fortress with arched gates. 


During a certain season he would wander with a happy look, amusing himself at the lake island, taking 


33 


repose; with meritorious purpose - giving away gifts. O benevolent and righteous king, supreme ruler, 
maharaja diraja, he who is lord, the grand sovereign, like the rain that nurtures life, he makes firm of his 
powerful army; His Majesty Sri Maharaja, the king of kings. 


I have also translated the Javanese kidung regarding Hang Tuha’s image among women in Majapahit: 


Come, this is the betel-leaf, please accept it as a way of appeasing this passionate feeling; though daily do I 
see you, yet this pang of love still misses you. 


Anxiety looms from among all the dames when seeing the Laksamana, the Malay raja’s soldier, strutting. 
Frenzy sets in among all of the girls upon seeing the Laksamana, the Malay raja's cavalier striding. 


How graceful is the beautiful daughter of the ironsmith, continually arousing passion in order that the heart 
grows fonder, by ever flavouring the betel-leaf with lime and other condiments. 


Startled is the person on the lover’s lap upon seeing the Laksamana marching, the hero from across the 
ocean. 


So follow you the man, when confronted kill him instantly, kill the second, and the third, and all his 
attendants, 


Panic grips the market people upon seeing the Laksamana coming afoot, the commander of the Malaka raja. 


Forgetful is the listless lover, heartbroken in love, yet still able to keep the promise to comfort the broken heart 
that is constantly depressed in sadness. 


Though the pain is already healed by the forgotten lover, there is still the yearning for love; even though I try 
to comfort my heart, it always longs for love. 


Commotion breaks out at the audience hall upon the arrival of the Laksamana, cavalier of the raja of 
Malaka. 


She wants to undo this hair of hers and wishes to cry for his company but the hair does not give happiness. 
Such is her cry for her hair: “Oh my, this hair of mine too is not happy’. 


Thus is the fortune of the Laksamana in Majapahit, always adored with passion of love by many. And soa 
song is thus composed: 


A drop of dew on the tip of the garlic’s leaf, 

It trickles from the leaf of the cumin, 

Throughout the day oh my, how I crave 

To be drunk in love; how I yearn the joy of falling in love 

Like having a bath in the open hall, the shame is indescribable, 
Feeling shame, and unhappy, oh how cruel it is, 


Forever crying, pining for his love. 


Conclusion 


The Krusenstern MS is possibly the oldest copy among all the manuscripts attributed to “Tun Seri 
Lanang”. This particular manuscript has been kept in Russia for no less than 200 years. Its existence in the 
Archive of the Institute of Oriental Manuscripts at Saint Petersburg was only made known to the outside 
world after the collapse of communism in Russia. The present recension will hopefully reveal new 
information about the true character of the Malay Annals, or more properly called the Sulalat u’s-Salatin. 


34 


Portuguese words in the Seyarah Melayu and the 
development of Malay vocabulary 


When Afonso Dalboquerque invaded Melaka in 1511, a new age of European entry into Asia began. 
With the city’s capture, the Portuguese dream of controlling the spice route from Southeast Asia to the 
Persian Gulf via the Indian Ocean was now a reality. As soon as Portuguese control was established, 
Dalboquerque wasted no time in attempting to restore Melaka to its position as an important trading 
emporium. He did his best to lure the Peguan, Indian and Chinese merchants back by giving them 
friendly treatment. He even established relations with neighbouring states, among which were Siam, Java 
and not least Kampar. 

Even though the native traders of Southeast Asia prevented the Portuguese from securing a monopoly 
over the rich spice trade, they were, nevertheless, able to secure a considerable share of the clove trade in 
the Moluccas and Ambon, nutmeg in Banda, as well as securing the sandalwood trade of Solor and 
Timor. They were able to do this by strictly following a policy of avoiding conflicts and concluding 
treaties with the native rulers of Eastern Indonesia. 

As the first of the Europeans who established a colony in Southeast Asia, the Portuguese certainly had 
to acquaint themselves with the language and culture of the people that they had come in contact with. 
While it is true that during their 130-year rule of Melaka, relations between the Portuguese and Asians 
were mainly confined to trading transactions, the nature of trade in Southeast Asia meant that the 
Portuguese had to adopt the language of the port cities where the intra-Asian trade was conducted, in 
order to communicate with the merchants. Malay was the regional lingua franca before the arrival of the 
Portuguese, and as such it is the purpose of this chapter to examine the influence of Portuguese on the 
Malay language and vice versa during the sixteenth, or more realistically, the seventeenth century. The 
observations made are based on the Portuguese words used in the Sejarah Melayu, namely the Blagden 
manuscript, which forms the body of the Raffles 18, considered by many as the oldest of its kind (it was 
written or copied before 1536) and other popular versions which included the first translation into 
English by John Leyden in 1810 (subsequently published in 1821 with an introduction by Raffles), the 
version edited by Abdullah Munsyi in 1840 or 1841, followed by the recensions by Shellabear (1896), 
Datuk Maradjo Indo (1959) and Abdul Samad Ahmad in 1986. 

The Leyden translation, as well as the transliteration of the Raffles 18 by Muhammad Haji Salleh 
(1994) and by Abdul Rahman Ismail (1995) have also been used to determine which version of the 
Sejarah Melayu is the earliest. By comparing these variants, the present writer thus studied the extent of 
Portuguese words used by the different copyists. 

When the first Portuguese arrived in Melaka on 11 September 1509 with a squadron of five vessels 
under the command of Diogo Lopes de Sequeira, they discovered that Melaka was very much 
interconnected with the port-cities of the Malay Archipelago. The main commercial centres were the 
Malay-speaking areas, which also included Pasai, Johor, Patani, Aceh and Brunei. The language was so 
commonly used that not only was Malay predominant in the archipelago, but it was also widely spoken in 
central and southern Philippines, and as far away as Paulo Condore, off the coast of southern Vietnam 
(Reid 1988:7). 

The conquest of Melaka has been well recorded by Afonso Dalboquerque himself and his son. But the 
events of 1509 and 1511 are also recorded in the Sejarah Melayu, long known to the Malays by its 
original title, Sulalat us-Salatin yakni pituturan segala raja-raja. To some it was called it the Hikayat 
Melayu (the Malay Chronicles). It was most probably written when Mahmud Syah, the last reigning Sultan 
of Melaka, was still alive. But the probability that it was written much earlier cannot be dismissed. The 
earlier parts could have even been written as early as the period of Muzaffar Syah (r. 1445-58/59), when 


35 


Melaka was already noted as a prosperous port city and envied by the Siamese. Over several generations, 
however, the Sejarah Melayu had undergone changes when copyists from one generation to another made 
interpolations, thus resulting in 44 complete and incomplete variants. 

Until now, determining the authorship of the original manuscript and the date of its composition are 
still being debated by scholars of Malay history. There has been, nevertheless, consensus among some 
scholars to agree with Sir Richard Winstedt that the Raffles 18, which was discovered and discussed at 
length by him in 1938. This particular version contains 31 stories which have been catagorised as chapters 
or narratives by the editors of the work. Eight of these, which formed the ending, have been published by 
C. O. Blagden (see Blagden 1925: 10-52). Winstedt is of the view that these eight narratives “contain that 
nucleus of the ordinary version” of the Sejarah Melayu (See Winstedt, “Preface”) that was copied in 1612. 

In his attempt to determine the date of authorship of the Sejarah Melayu, Winstedt had observed that 
the Blagden manuscript had not recorded any event of historical importance beyond 1535. In its last 
narrative, the Blagden manuscript described the arrival of Raja Zainal, the Pahang prince, at Sayong, on 
the upper reaches of the Johor river, asking for recognition from Johor’s Sultan ‘Alauddin as Sultan. The 
attack launched by da Gama and 400 Portuguese soldiers in 1536 on the Johor river, where the Malays 
suffered heavy casualties, after which they were forced to seek peace with the Portuguese, was also not 
mentioned.’ Winstedt argues that while most versions of the Malay Annals recorded events occurring 
after 1536, the author of the Blagden manuscript had also not ended his story with a peroration or 
colophon. Winstedt suspected that the manuscript could have been carried off by someone in the 
Portuguese squadron (see Winstedt 1938: 30). That the Blagden manuscript seemed to be the earliest 
version was also demonstrated not only by the sheer shortness of the manuscript, but also by the short list 
of the genealogy of the Melaka nobility which did not extend beyond the grandchildren of the Bendahara, 
Tun Ali Hati, whom Sultan Mahmud had executed in 1510. In the later versions of the post-1612 work, 
the copyist nevertheless tried to emphasise the close relationship that existed between the Sultans and the 
Bendaharas. 

In his attempt to prove that the Blagden manuscript was the oldest version of the Sejarah Melayu, 
Winstedt indeed had several plausible arguments. W. Linehan had also supported Winstedt’s contention 
that the preface of the copy of the Raffles 18 in the holdings of the Library of the Royal Asiatic Society had 
differences from the Shellabear preface. While the Raffles 18 preface does not mention the death of Johor’s 
Sultan ‘Alauddin in Aceh, it is mentioned in the Shellabear recension. While most writers have come to a 
consensus that the Raffles 18 copy is one of, if not the earliest version, Abdul Samad Ahmad, who 
published one version of the Sejarah Melayu in 1979 (using the three versions kept in the library of 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka in Kuala Lumpur), did not think so. He put forward the argument that the 
word “peraturan” in the sentence “Maka fakir namainya hikayat ini Sulalat us-Salatina |sic], yakni 
peraturan segala raja-raja” was misleading. Samad failed to comprehend that Winstedt's reading of the 
Jawi spelling /p/t/w/t/w/r/n/ had in fact led to the mispronunciation of the word, thus derailing its true 
meaning. This particular orthographical error has nevertheless been corrected by Abdul Rahman Ismail, 
who correctly deciphered the Jawi spelling of the word. A. Samad Ahmad also disputed Winstedt’s 
contention that the “author” of the Sejarah Melayu in 1612 was Tun Bambang. 

In order to verify the age of the original manuscript of the Sejarah Melayu, the present writer believes 
that another method is by looking at the extent of Portuguese words used in each particular recension of 
the Malay Annals. The present writer has also edited the Krusenstern MS, copied upon the instructions of 
Adam Krusenstern in mid-1798 (See Ahmat Adam 2016: Introduction, and the preceding chapter for 
more details). 

Looking at the Blagden manuscript, it is pertinent to note that in the abovementioned eight narratives, 
the events of 1509 and 1511 have not been included. Instead, they tell the story of the last days of Sultan 
Mahmud Syah in Bentan, and how he and his subjects had to face the Portuguese attacks and the two 
attempts by the Malays to attack the Portuguese in Melaka. These encounters that the Malays had with the 
Portuguese after the conquest of Melaka are interesting because in no other versions of the Malay Annals 


36 


are the two attempts so vividly described. The chapters in the Blagden manuscript also seem to have been 
written based on the fresh memories of the author. The Portuguese words used in this version of the Malay 
Annals can be assumed to be loan words that had been absorbed into the Malay language by that time, and 
were certainly familiar to the author. The fact that the manuscript ended with a narrative about Raja Zainal 
arriving in Sayong is more evidence that the later copyists, especially the compiler of the Raffles 18, had 
tried to extend the narrative by including later events such as those found in the Shellabear version, the 
copies used by Abdullah Munsyi when he printed his edition in 1840/1841 and the copy that John Leyden 
used for his English translation. 

In order to make a comparison on the use of Portuguese and other European loan words in the Malay 
Annals, we shall begin by looking at the Portuguese words used by the author of the Blagden manuscript. 
Although the Portuguese loan words used in said version could also be found in the later versions, there 
are, nonetheless, some other words which are glaringly absent in in the Raffles 18. For example, the 
episode about the first Portuguese landing on Melaka (which, according to the Krusenstern MS, was 
followed by an attack led by Captain Gonsalo Pereira) is inserted into Narrative 32 of the Shellabear 
version (Narrative 28 in the Krusenstern MS), and it also narrates the invasion of Kota Mahligai by the 
Siamese prince, Chau Sri Bangsa, and how the Patani negeri (state) was created. This narrative was 
somehow is omitted by the copyist or author of the Raffles 18. The missing story of the first Portuguese 
attack was nevertheless included in the episode about the invasion of Pahang by the Siamese Raja of Ligor 
in Narrative 21 of the Raffles 18. But interestingly enough, when narrating the first Portuguese visit to 
Melaka, the author of this particular variant did not mention Captain Gonsalo Pereira’ name when 
narrating the first attack on Melaka.’ Pereira is only named in the Krusenstern MS, the Shellabear and 
other versions proclaiming Tun Seri Lanang as the purported author. However, the word “bizurai” 
(vizier) instead of “wazir” is also used in the Raffles 18; the latter is not to be found in the Blagden 
manuscript. Although “wazir” appears to be closer to the original Portuguese word “vizir’, the vowel [ i ] 
used in “bizurai” seems closer in proximity to “vizir”. Therefore, the use of the loan word “bizurai” 
instead of “wazir” could perhaps be interpreted as an indication that this variant was written at an earlier 
date. 

The Malay language had drawn considerable interest of Europeans from as early as 1521, when the 
Italian Antonio Pigafetta arrived in the Moluccas. He was so drawn to the fact that the people of that 
region were using the Malay language as it was spoken in Melaka. Untrained as he was in language and 
linguistics, Pigafetta had relied on a Malay speaker from Sumatra to provide him with the data for his 
compilation of Malay words, which ultimately became the first written Malay glossary. Sixty years later, 
van Linschoten, a Dutch sailor, who had visited Indonesia, reported that Malay was not only a well- 
known language, but was also the most courtly of the Oriental tongues, a knowledge of which was as 
indispensable in the Indies as that of French in Holland (Takdir Alisjahbana 1956: 8). Even St Francis 
Xavier wrote his comments on Christian doctrines in the Malay language when he visited the Moluccas in 
the sixteenth century. 

Indeed, when the Sultan of Ternate was competing for Portuguese favour against the Sultan of Tidore, 
two letters in Malay were sent to the King of Portugal in 1521 and 1522, even though the style of the 
Malay language used was not smooth, and possibly written by a scribe or scribes not well acquainted with 
the language (Blagden 1930: 87-101). These letters, like the ones written by the Sultan of Aceh and 
addressed to Queen Elizabeth of England in 1602 and to King James in 1612 (WG. Shellabear 1898: 
107-120), are indicative of the importance of the Malay language for communication in the Malay world 
of Southeast Asia. However, it is interesting to note that in all the above letters, no Portuguese words were 
used. But in the Raja of Brunei’s letter addressed to an English captain at Jambi, which was probably 
written in the early seventeenth century, the word “Sinyor” (from the Portuguese “senhor’, meaning 
“feudal lord”) was used when addressing the English captain. 

It is difficult to determine when Portuguese words were absorbed by the Malay language. However, it 
may be possible to speculate that the Portuguese word “tranqueira” must have first been introduced by the 


ST 


Portuguese when they wanted to translate the Malay word “kubu”, which today is the name of a place in 
Melaka. Incidentally, the area called Kubu is also adjacent to the present-day suburb of Tranquerah. Based 
on the Portuguese sources of Jao de Barros (see Pintado (1993: 153, 161), the Malays had set up palisades 
along the beach and a timber stockade near the Melaka bridge in 1511; meanwhile the Javanese had also 
built their defences in the suburbs of what was then known as Upeh, but now recognised as Tengkera and 
Limbungan (meaning a dock for loading, unloading and repair of ships). 

Based on the Sejarah Melayu (1612 or earlier) and the Hikayat Hang Tuha, which was written at a later 
date, one can speculate that Portuguese influence on the Malay language probably took effect by the 
beginning of the mid-sixteenth century. Using the more prominent versions of the Sejarah Melayu, it 
would be possible to say that the earliest words used by the Malays were those connected with navigation, 
military wares, and title-ranks of soldiers or naval officers such as Kapitan (capitao, or “captain”) and 
Kapitan Mor. The word “mor” is the short and poetic form of “maior”, which means “major” in 
Portuguese (“Captain Major”). Judging from the Portuguese words in the Raffles 18 and other versions, it 
can be said that not many loan words were absorbed by the authors or copyists. Out of the thirty-one 
narratives found in the Raffles 18, only in Narratives 21 and 24 can one find Portuguese loan words. 
Surprisingly, although Narrative 23 describes the final attack which finally sees the fall of Melaka to the 
Portuguese, no Portuguese words are found, unlike in Narrative 21. 

In both Shellabear’s and Abdullah Munsyi’s editions of the Sejarah Melayu, the Portuguese words are 
found in Narratives 32 and 34 which, like Narratives 21 and 24 of the Raffles 18, also provide a narrative 
of the Portuguese attack on Melaka. Like Narrative 24 of the Raffles 18, Narrative 32 of both editions 
describes the first attack by the Portuguese on Melaka and the final conquest of Melaka is described in 
Narrative 34 of Shellabear’s and Abdullah's editions. The narrative ends with Raja Abdullah of Kampar, 
tricked by the Portuguese into boarding their ship only to be held captive and then sent to Goa later (this 
also appears in Munsyi Abdullah's version). It is in this chapter that some Portuguese words have also been 
used. Based on these chapters, it appears that the Portuguese loan words were only used by the authors or 
copyists of later years. 

Listed below are words of Portuguese origin that have been absorbed into the Malay language and 
were most probably used by the author or copyists only in the context of discussing episodes which 
involved the Malays and the Portuguese. Strangely enough, these loan words are not found anywhere else. 
This glaring absence indicates that the chapters containing these words were probably written by 
someone who had witnessed the events of 1509, 1511 and the period after Melaka was occupied, when the 
Malays had to face the Portuguese forces in Johor, Kampar and Bentan. 

Looking at some of the words used, it is interesting to note that besides Portuguese words, there were 
also two words of Dutch origin being used, namely the word “senapang” (from “senaphan’” for “musket”). 
This is found in Narrative 34 of the Shellabear version, which described the captivity of the Raja of 
Kampar. Also interesting is the use of the word “Castilan” from Portuguese “castilao” in Narrative 25 of 
the Shellabear version. But the word is also Spanish. In the Sejarah Melayu, it is used when describing the 
circumstances that led to the Raja of Moluku making his escape to Melaka during the reign of Sultan 
‘Alauddin. According to the writer, the Raja of Moluku was defeated by “Kastilan”, which most probably 
refers to the Spanish military force. However, this is strange since it was not possible for Spain to make its 
presence in the Malay Archipelago felt before the advent of the Portuguese in 1509. The use of this word 
probably shows that this particular narrative (which does not seem to exist in the Raffles 18) was copied 
during a later period, most probably the early seventeenth century when Spain was already present in the 
eastern part of the archipelago.’ 

In order to ascertain which version of the Sejarah Melayu was written before the 1612 copy, it would 
be worthwhile to compare the narratives about the description of the strength of the Portuguese naval 
forces, according to the different versions of the Sejarah Melayu. It is interesting to note that while the 
Raffles 18 enumerated the number of warships as: 


Fongso Dhalberkarki pun naik ke Portugal mengadap Raja Portugal minta irmada [ 3 ],* maka diberi oleh 


38 


Raja Portugal empat buah kapal dan lima buah ghali panjang. Maka ia turun berlengkap pula di Guha tiga 
buah kapal, lapan ghalias, empat buah ghali panjang, lima belas fusta, maka jadi empat puluh semuanya ... 
Maka dipersembahkan oranglah kepada Sultan Ahmad “bahawa Feringgi datang menyerang, tujuh buah kapal 
dan lapan ghalias dan sepuluh buah ghali dan pencalang lima belas buah dan fusta lima buah ..” (Raffles 18: 
narrative 23, f.191). 


(Afonso Dalboquerque then headed for Portugal to see the King of Portugal in order to request armadas 
which the King of Portugal then gave him, viz. four ships and five long galleys. He then came down to Goa 
fully armed with three ships, eight galleys, four long galleons, [and] 15 pinnaces making it 40 altogether ... 
and it was conveyed to Sultan Ahmad “that the Portuguese have come to attack [with] seven ships, eight 
galleons and 10 galleys as well as 15 look-out ships and five pinnaces ...”) 


From the above description, it is clear that when Afonso Dalboquerque departed for Melaka he had with 
him only 40 ships of different types.’ The report conveyed to Sultan Ahmad of Melaka, however, was that 
the Portuguese had arrived with seven ships, eight galleass (Portuguese: galeaca) and ten galleys 
(Portuguese: galé) and fifteen pencalang® plus five pinnaces.’ Although the report suggests that there was 
an excess of five vessels, it could nonetheless be speculated that when Afonso Dalboquerque left Goa, he 
had with him forty vessels but this number was exaggerated by the later copyists of the Sejarah Melayu. 
Based on this assumption, it goes without saying that the Raffles 18 version was indeed copied from an 
early text, perhaps the earliest, that was the same main copy that the Krusenstern MS was based on. This is 
because a similar narrative about the warships that Dalboquerque received from the King of Portugal is 
found in the final narrative (Narrative 30) of the Krusenstern MS. 

Besides mentioning the total number of 43 vessels which include ghalias for ghalleys, armada, fusta 
and pencalang, the last chapter that describes the attack by the Melaka people led by Sultan Ahmad against 
the Portuguese mentions only two Portuguese words. Only the Portuguese words “setinggar” [sic] from 
“espingarda” (“shotgun”) and “Dewas” from “Deus” (“God”) are found in the Krusenstern MS. This 
indirectly shows that this version of the Sejarah Melayu was written just after the period of the conquest of 
Melaka. 

However, in Narrative 28 of the Krusenstern MS, the words “kapitan”, “kapitan mor’, “wizurai’, or its 
variant “bizurai’, have been written by one of the manuscript’s copyists. Other words found are “ghali” 
(from “galé”), “ghalias” (“galeaga” or “galeaod”), “ghali panjang’, “fusta” and “peluru” [ s.54 | (from 
“pelouro’, meaning “cannon ball”). 

Looking at the Portuguese loan words in the Blagden manuscript, such as “sinyor” (from “senhor’), 
“gereja’ (from “igreja” for “church’) and others used in the major popular versions of the Sulalat us- 
Salatin, it can also be deduced that the presence of words such as “karakah” (from Spanish “caraca”, an 
ancient ship), “réal’® (from Portuguese “real”) “cepiau” (from Portuguese “chapéu” meaning “hat”), 
“soldadu” (from “soldado” for “soldier”), “beranda” (from Portuguese “veranda” for “verandah’), and 
“wardi’ (from “ordi”, meaning “instruction” or “order”) found in the Shellabear and Abdullah editions, 
must have entered the Malay vocabulary in the early seventeenth century. Words of Spanish and Dutch 
origins may also indicate that both the Abdullah and Shellabear versions of the Sejarah Melayu and the 
manuscript used by John Leyden for his English translation were not written or copied earlier than the 
seventeenth century. Further to that, the presence of the word “manggusta” (from Portuguese 
“mangostad” ) in a pantun in both the Blagden recension and the Raffles 18 (see Narrative 24), which 
cannot be found in anywhere else in the other versions also indicate that the Blagden manuscript was 
copied by a copyist who was already familiar with the mangosteen fruit. This may indicate that both 
manuscripts were copied later than the versions that end with the chapter of the killing of Tun Ali Hati, 
meaning that the Raffles 18 may not be the earliest version of the Malay Annals. 

Over the last five hundred years, the Malay language, which has always been exposed to foreign 
influences in terms of its linguistic development, has clearly been enriched in terms of its vocabulary by 
the Portuguese language. After making its way into the classical text of the Sejarah Melayu, Portuguese 
words soon crept into daily use. Today, like the other foreign words found in the Malay language, one can 


39 


easily notice the presence of several Malay words of Portuguese origin as well. For the purposes of easy 
recognition, these words can be categorised into clusters which cover areas such as navigation and trade, 


furniture and household items, food and leisure, and entertainment. 


Words pertaining to navigation, which have already been discussed with regard to their presence in 


the Malay Annals, also include words concerning trade as shown below: 


Words pertaining to navigation 


Malay 
baluarti 
beledu 
bendera 
bulu 

cit 

cita 
kernu 
lancang 
lancar 
lelong 
limau 


sisa 


almari 
baldi 
bangku 
beranda 
jendela 
lampu 
meja 
mertul 
pita 


tangki 


bola 
biola 
boneka 
dadu 
pesta 


tambur 


amar 


Portuguese 
baluarte 
veludo 
bandeira 
velo 
citao 
chita 
corno 
lancao 
langar 
leilad 
limao 


sisa 


Meaning 

bulwark 

velvet 

flag; banner 

fleece; wool 

chintz 

calico; cotton print 
powderhorn 

large launch; barge 
tolaunch 

auction 

lemon 


transfer tax 


Words pertaining to furniture and the house 


armario 
balde 
banco 
varanda 
janela 
lampiao 
mesa 
martelo 
fita 


tanque 


cupboard, closet 
bucket, pail 
bench, stool 
veranda 
window 

a large lamp 
table 

hammer 

tape 


tank 


Words pertaining to leisure and games 


bola 
viola 
boneca 
dado 
festa 


tambor 


amar 


ball 
violin 
doll 
dice 
party 


drum 


Words pertaining to positions 


to love; to like very much, as in the honorific Seri Amar 


40 


gornardor 
kampitan 
mandur 
merinyu 
mesteri 
padri 


pakenira 


Bolu 

keju 

kubis 

labu 
mentega 
pau 

roti paong 


salai 


terigu 


bantal 
butang 
cerutu 
fideru 
garpu 
kemeja 
kereta 
kersang 
pena 
peniti 
perada 
petam 
renda 
roda 
sabun 
sepatu 
tinta 


tuala 


bersiar 


governador 
capitao 
mando 
meirinho 
mestre 
padre 


faccioniaria 


bolo 
quueijo 
couves 
nabo 


manteiga 


governor 
captain 

authority 
inspector 
a master hand at anything 
priest, church minister 


factionary, partisan 


Words pertaining to food 


cake 

cheese 

cabbage 

turnip, pumpkin 
butter 


bread 


Bread, usually the loaf kind 


salted meat 


flour 


Words pertaining to common items 


camesa 
carreta 
coracao 
pena 
alfinete 
perada 
fito 
renda 
roda 
sabao 
sapatao 
tinta 


toalha 


passier 


pillow 
button 
cigar 
glass 
fork 
shirt 
cart, vehicle 
brooch 
pen; feather pen 
pin 
tinsel. gold foil 
band; tape 
lace 
wheel 
soap 
shoe 
ink 
towel 
Others 


to take a walk 


4] 


dari dali from 
gagau gago dumb, stammer 
gelojoh geluso gluttonous 
kisar pisar to pound, hand mill for rice; motion in circle 
meski[pun] masque even though 
minggu domingo Sunday 
palsu falso false 
saku Saco pocket 
sekolah escolar school 
tempoh tempo time, period 
tentu tanto so much, as much; surely 
tukar trocar to change 
Malay words that have been absorbed by Portuguese 
amouco from amok frenzied attack 
baileu from balai audience-hall 
baju from baju coat 
bende from bende okra 
calaluz from kelulus a type of boat 
ducao from dusun orchard 
duriao from durian durian 
ganigos from ganas violent 
gongo from gong gong 
jambo from jambu guava (Malay apple) 
Malaio from Melayu Malay 
Malaico from bahasa Melayu Malay language 
parao, paro from perahu a boat 
rota from rotan rattan 
sagu from sagu Sago 
sampana from sampan sampan 
tuaca from tuak toddy 
velejar from berlayar to sail 
veniaga from berniaga to trade 


From the above list it seems clear that many Portuguese words which have crept into the Malay 
language are words that concern navigation and trade merchandise. There are a few words concerning 
furniture, but certainly very few words concerning games and pastimes or even the arts. It appears that a 
few words in the Malay language have also been incorporated into the vocabulary of modern Portuguese. 
This bilateral exchange of vocabulary is quite natural, considering the fact that the Portuguese ruled 
Melaka from 1511 until 1641. The existence of the mestico (mixed-race) Portuguese community in 
Melaka today is another piece of evidence of the Portuguese presence that even exceeded the period of the 
Melaka sultanate. But Portuguese history in Melaka also recorded the bitter hatred harboured by the 


42 


conquerors of Melaka, especially Afonso Dalboquerque and his lieutenants, towards the Bendahara of 
Melaka between 1509 and 1511. It is therefore not surprising that the Malay word “bandarra” that crept 
into the Portuguese language bears the meaning of “loafer”, “idler”, “sluggard”. In relation to that, the 
word “bandalheira” gives the meaning of “low behaviour”. 

The period of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was indeed a new era for the development of the 
Malay language. It was a period of rapid change for Southeast Asia. Anthony Reid calls it the “age of 
commerce’, which saw the port cities, especially in the Malay World, coming closer to each other via 
maritime links established long before the arrival of the Europeans. This link was further promoted by the 
widespread acceptance of the Malay language as the lingua franca of the region. When the Dutch arrived 
to establish their challenge to Portuguese dominance, the Malay language continued to respond to 
European culture by borrowing numerous elements from the Dutch, and later, the English languages. 


' According to Macgregor (1956: 25) the Portuguese attacked the capital of Johor in 1535 and 1536. 

* There is however a slight confusion in the narrative when the copyist mistakenly identified the Viceroy as the one leading the 
attack, while at the same time stating that the Kapitan Mor himself reported the incident to the Viceroy at Goa. 

> Spanish forces defeated Maluku in 1606 under the governor of the Philippines, Don Pedro de Acuna. See Andaya (1993: 19). 

*It is spelt /alif /ya/ ra / mim /dal / (a-y-r-m-d). 

° John Leyden translated the description as: “four great ships, five large carracks, for galleons”; at Goa another “three ships, eight 
galleasses and four galleons and four fasta, in all being forty-three ...” 

° Galleys are ships with oars while “pencalang” are lookout ships. 

” Pinnaces, called “fusta” in Portuguese, are small boats which form part of the Portuguese war vessels. 

® See Chapter 31 in Abdullah Munsyi (Situmorang & Teeuw 1952: 289) and Shellabear (1967: 197). 


43 


Mystic letters and their influence in the Malay World 


Introduction 


The beginnings of the idea of writing can be traced back to the fourth millennium BCE and earlier in 
Mesopotamia. It subsequently spread to the Indus Valley and China, then westward to Egypt, Anatolia and 
Minoan Crete. In Mesopotamian mythology, Nabu, the son of Marduk, king of the Babylonian pantheon, 
is credited with the invention of writing. Through Plato, we know that Egyptian mythology, on the other 
hand, attributed the discovery of writing to Thoth, who was also the god of sorcery. The idea of writing 
having a mystical influence also found its place among Christians, Jews and Muslims in the Middle Ages 
and the Renaissance. In the post-biblical Jewish tradition, Adam or Enoch was often referred to as the 
discoverer of the alphabet, magic, alchemy and astrology. The Holy Qur'an also associates writing with 
divine revelation. The angel Gabriel transmitted God's revelations to the Prophet Muhammad s.a.w. by 
asking the latter to recite from the writings that Gabriel brought down from Heaven. 


Mystical letters in the Qur’an 


Until today, scholars studying the verses in the Holy Qur’an have not been able to fully explain the 
meaning of the mystical letters that are often found preceding certain verses. Much speculation surrounds 
these mystical letters (Alif, Lam Mim etc.). A mystical thirteenth-century Sufi text holds that all of God's 
secrets are hidden in the Holy Qur'an. The founder of the Hurufi sect in the fourteenth century, Fadl Allah 
(d. 796 H/1394 CE) from Astrabad, Persia, started life as a Sufi and taught his followers that God revealed 
Himself to the world through the thirty-two letters of the Persian alphabet. He claimed that the totality of 
these letters and their numerical sum was the manifestation of God Himself. More will be discussed 
below. Although Sufism was born out of Islam, and drew its inspiration from the Qur'an and the Prophet's 
traditions, its development was strongly influenced by Hellenistic philosophy and Christian asceticism 
(Nicholson, 1949: 212-213). One notices, for example, the neo-Platonic influence on the symbolism 
attached to letters of the alphabet. Pythagoras (c. 580-500 BCE) gave a central place to numbers and his 
philosophy influenced Plato who, it is said, prepared the intellectual ground for letter and number 
mysticism (The Encyclopedia of Religion, 1: 217). The belief in the occult uses of the alphabet and 
numerology appeared to have had a widespread influence in the Middle Ages, especially among Jews and 
Muslims. 

Among Muslims, the fourteen mystic letters which, either in their combined or singular forms, are 
found at the head of the 29 Suras of the Qur'an, constituting half the total number of letters in the Arabic 
alphabet. The letters (huruf) are: 


e Alif Lam Ra (ALR), at the head of Suras 10, 11, 12, 14 and 15; 
e Alif Lam Mim (ALM), at head of Suras 2, 3, 29, 30, 31 and 32; 
e¢ Alif Lam Mim Ra (ALMR), at the head of Sura 13; 

¢ Alif Lam Mim Sin (ALMS), at the head of Sura 7; 

e Ha Mim (HM) at the head of Suras 40, 41, 43, 44, 45 and 46; 
e Ha Mim ‘Ayn Sin Qaf (HM ‘ASQ), at the head of Sura 42; 

e Sad (S), at the head of Sura 38; 

e Ta’ Sin (TS), at the head of Sura 27; 

e Ta’ Sin Mim (TSM), at the head of Suras 26 and 28; 


44 


e Ta’ Ha (TH), at the head of Sura 20; 

¢ Qaf (Q), at the head of Sura 50; 

e Ya’ ‘Ayn Sad (QHY ‘AS), at the head of Sura 19; 
e Nun (N), at the head of Sura 68; and 

e Ya Sin (YS), at the head of Sura 36. 


Until today, they continue to mystify many Muslims and for centuries aroused inconclusive debates which 
resulted in several speculations among both Muslim and non-Muslim scholars alike.’ As stated by 
Abdullah Yusuf Ali, in his introduction to Sura Yunus, the “[a]bbreviated letters are mystic symbols, about 
whose meaning there is no authoritative explanation ... but no one should be dogmatic in speculation 
about mystic symbols’ (Abdullah Yusuf Ali, The Holy Qur'an — Introduction to Sura X, p.481). 


The basic elements 


The twenty-eight letters are divided into four categories of seven letters each, which correspond to the four 
basic elements: fire, air, water and earth. Alif (the first letter) is fiery, ba (the second) is airy, jim (the third) 
is watery and dhal (the fourth) is earthy. Then the sequence begins again, running through the whole 
alphabet. Thus, we have: 


¢ Seven fiery letters, namely: alif, [!], dhal[4], taa[+], mim [e], fa 
[4], sin [ ] and shin [ 4]; 
e Seven airy letters, namely: ba [=], ta[@], daad[ v2], waw[ 3], ya[ ¢], nun [0] and sin[ v2]; 


¢ Seven watery letters, namely: jim [ ¢ ], zay[ 5], sin[ Uv], zaa [4], qaf[ 3], waw[ 5] and ghayn [ ¢ 
]; and 


¢ Seven earthy letters, namely: ha [ c ], kha [¢], dal[ +], lam [J], ra 
[>], ayn [& ] and ghayn [ ¢ J. 


Each category has roles in divination, magic and astrology. The fiery letters were known to have been used 
in divination and magic as well as in order to ward off any evils with cold characteristics, or to increase 
heat whenever it was desired, whether in the physical or astral plane. Meanwhile, the watery letters were 
used to predict and ward off all the ills associated with heat, such as various kinds of fevers. The mystique 
that these letters possessed, however, could only be unveiled by those with the inner vision (al-kashf). 
Only those who were able to read the mystical properties of the letters could penetrate the secrets of God. 
Thus, to the Sufis and members of the various Tarekat (Sufi orders) in the Islamic world, each of the 
twenty-eight letters in the Qur’anic alphabet were recognised as having a numerical value of a mystical 
nature. 

The letter Alif (A), for example, is said to have a numerical value of one. One is symbolic of the one 
God, and thus Alif represents Allah. The word “Allah” is composed of four letters, which correspond to the 
four elements: earth, water, air and fire. Sufis from the Naqshabandya order point out that in writing, the 
letter Alif cannot be joined by any other letter to form a word in the Arabic script. On the other hand, any 
other letter that begins to form a word may need the Alif. According to the Sufis, this is analogous to Allah 
being independent. But His creations would be dependent on Him (as symbolised by the need for other 
letters of the Qur’anic alphabet). Another example is the letter Ba (B) which has the numerical value of 
two, and stands for al-Baqi, a word that means “everlasting”. The Sufis point out that Allah, as shown by 
the Qur'anic verse in Surah an-Nahl (16: 96), is indeed everlasting. Sufis also believe that Ba is also 
endowed with the mystical symbolism of embracing the entire meaning of the Quran, while the Syi’ites 
believe that the dot underneath the letter represents Ali. 


45 


The spread of Islam 


Based on archaeological evidence and written sources (mainly Chinese and Arab), the people in the 
Malay World had already been in contact with Muslim traders and travellers since the middle of the ninth 
century. Muslim gravestones have been found in Champa, Indochina, and later in the twelfth and thirteen 
centuries in Samudera-Pasai in northern Sumatra, and Java. In Sumatra, the date inscribed on the 
gravestone of Sultan Malik al-Saleh is 696 H/1297 CE. His son, Malik al-Zahir, died in 726 H/1326 CE 
(al-Attas, 2011: 26-27). In Malaysia, the first instance of the Arabic alphabet being used to record the 
Malay language was carved on the Terengganu Stone (Batu Bersurat Terengganu), which was dated back 
to 708 H/1308 CE.’ Based on archaeological evidence, there is presently a consensus among historians 
that Islam found a stronger foothold in Southeast Asia in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, 
particularly in the Malay peninsula, the Malay province in southern Thailand, Borneo and the islands of 
Java, Sumatra, Celebes and the Philippines, especially after local rulers embraced the religion. As for 
Champa in Indochina, even though the gravestone belonging to a Persian Muslim gives the date of 1039 
CE, there is no other evidence to show that Islam was widely adopted by the Champa Malays, in spite of 
the fact that a Cambodian Malay king named Reameathipadai 1 (r. 1642-58 CE) had embraced Islam and 
took the name Ibrahim. That the process of Islamisation in these regions took place only at a gradual pace 
has been shown to be true by many historians, although how and by whom the process was undertaken is 
still subject to an ongoing debate. 

Archaeological evidence and local literary sources, however, seem to point to the important role of 
Sufism in the propagation of Islam in its early beginnings, although the part played by Muslim traders 
could not be discounted. Malay literary sources also appear to show that the da’wah movement 
undertaken by both Sufis and members of the trading community from the Middle East also involved 
Indo-Persian missionaries from the Indian subcontinent. But when these Muslims first came to Southeast 
Asia, they probably encountered the magico-religious practices of the local people, which had their roots 
in Hindu-Buddhist beliefs. Malay manuscripts which were copied over the centuries, especially from the 
late sixteenth to the early seventeenth centuries, seem to have originated in a much earlier period. 
Manuscripts elucidating the practice of divination and magic in the Malay Archipelago (as manifested in 
astrology, time-reckoning practices and some form of calendrical system, talismans, medicinal magic etc.) 
appear to suggest that such practices possessed elements of Hinduism and Buddhism. 


Alphabet mysticism and its influence in Southeast Asia 


The mystic letters most often used in the Malay Archipelago in the late sixteenth century, or possibly 
earlier, were abjd ( =e ), hawz ( 3 94) (pronouced abjad hawaz). The earliest evidence of the use of 
mystic letters is found in the manuscript studied by Syed Naguib al-Attas, the Aqaid of Nasafi dated 998 
H, the year of Ba (1590 CE) (al-Attas, 1988). The role of the mystical letters in the determining the name 
of a particular Hegira year, as practised in the Malay Archipelago, has already been partly discussed in a 
separate work by this writer. But perhaps I shall need to look at it again and try to relate it with the process 
of Islamisation in Southeast Asia. I shall also try to look at other cultural aspects in the Malay World that 
have been influenced by mystical letters, namely in the areas of divination, magic and the effort to spread 
the teachings of Islam through mysticism. 

As late as the nineteenth century, Muslims in Southeast Asia still described the Hegira calendrical 
system as Tahun Kamariya, or Lunar Year. It was based on the simple eight-year cycle (the small dawr or 
daur kecil) as opposed to the more complex 30-year cycle introduced by Caliph Umar and the 120-year 
cycle (the big dawr or daur besar). The eight-year cycle was a unique system practised only among the 
Malay peoples of Southeast Asia. According to this calendrical system, each particular year in the eight- 
year cycle was associated with a huruf. As to how a particular huruf was assigned to a particular year, a 
nineteenth-century Malay manuscript which was, I believe, only a copy of an older manuscript, explained 
that: 


46 


Not knowing the year that is to be assigned with the alphabet [abjad], you should take the year of the 
Prophet (s.a.w.), cast off eights, until the Hegira year is used up... 


This really means that the Hegira year of say, 1153, should be divided by eight and the remainder, which 
would be one, will give the signature of that particular year as an Alif year. A remainder of two would give 
the year as Ba, whereas a remainder of three would be named a Jim year, and so on and so forth. This 
simple way of determining the signature of a particular year was based on the notion that the small dawr 
was based on the seven letters of the Arabic alphabet (Alif, Ha, Jim, Zay, Dal, Ba, Waw, plus a repeat of 
one letter (which was either Dal or Jim) that made up the mnemonic, AHJZDBWD (pronounced 
ahjazdabuda). These seven letters (plus one) were also adopted by the Muslims of peninsular Malaysia, 
Sumatera, Java and Buton (in the Moluccas, eastern Indonesia), as well as the southern Philippines, as 
signatures for the Muslim lunar months of Muharram (Alif), Safar (Jim), Raib’ul-awal (Dal), Rabi’ul- 
akhir (Waw), Jamadil-awal (Zay), Jamadil-akhir (Ba), Rajab (Jim), Sya’ban (Ha), Ramadzan (Waw), 
Shawal (Alif), Dhulkaedah (Ba) and Dhulhijjah (Dal). The numerical values for these are as follows: 


Alif 1 

Ha5 

Jim 3 

Zay 7 

Dal4 

Ba 2 

Waw 6 

Before the establishment of Islam, the Malays of Patani (now part of southern Thailand) used to name the 
different years of their calendrical cycle after the names of animals such as the tiger, snake, goat, fowl or 
deer. This practice of designating the years with the names of animals continued, although temporarily, 
after the eight-year cycle was adopted. In a manuscript that appeared to be a copy of a much earlier 
document (see Maleis handschriften 107. 85, no. 3), each of the above letters was assigned with the name 
of an animal; thus the year of Alif had, according to one manuscript (from Sumatra?), the rat as its 
signature; if it was a Ha year, then the animal was the tiger; whereas the year of Jim would have the mouse 
deer (chevrotain) as the signature. The animal for Zay was the dragon; Dal awal (the earlier Dal), the 
snake; Ba, the goat; Waw, the tiger [sic]; and Dal akhir (the latter Dal), the deer. Nevertheless, names of 
animals assigned to the cycle varied from region to region. In peninsular Malaya, the animal designated 
for Alif was the buffalo; for Ba it was the goat; the signature for the Jim year was the tiger; while the 
signature for Waw was the fowl. 

We think the adoption of these seven letters to construct a simple indigenous Muslim calendar in 
Southeast Asia had something to with do the process of Islamising the indigenous people of the Malay 
Archipelago. The prefatory formula “Bism il-lahi r-rahmani r-rahim” (in the name of God, the beneficent, 
the merciful), which all good Muslims utter when they begin to do any work, is composed of 19 letters. 
These letters represent the 19 spirits guarding the Gates of Hell. The Fatihah which, being the foundation 
of the Qur'an, is the first Sura in the holy book, and is made up of seven sentences, which correspond to the 
seven heavens, seven earths, seven planets and seven days of the week. Indeed, the choice of the seven 
letters by the people of the Malay World must have been due to the significance of the letters in the Qur'an, 
since the letters symbolised the seven stars or planets. The Quranic verse (Q 17: 14) mentions the seven 
heavens, while seven also refers to the Seven Gates of Hell (Q 15: 44). In Sura 31, verse 27, there is also 
mention of seven oceans. Ibn Arabi wrote that God had seven main divine attributes: Hearing, Living, 
Seeing, Willing, Ability, Knowledge and Speaking.’ Yet even though seven was perceived as a divine 
number, one more letter from the same group of seven mystic letters had to be repeated in order make up 
the eight letters of the small dawr. 

For the Malays of the peninsula, Aceh, Patani, the southern Philippines and Buton Island, it was the 
letter Dal, whose numerical value was four, which was named Dal akhir. The Javanese and the Sundanese, 


47 


on the other hand, chose the letter Jim which they called Jim akhir (the latter Jim). According to Shi'ite 
mystics, this number symbolised the eight heavens (the last being the location of God's throne), and had 
also been perceived as an auspicious number since time immemorial. In Persian literature, it was 
mentioned that while there were seven Hells, there were eight Paradises (Schimmel, 1993: 156-157). 
Beyond the seven spheres of the planets there was an eighth sphere, where the fixed stars were located. In 
ancient Babylonian myths, god resided in the eighth storey of the Babylonian temple. One should also not 
forget that during the pre-Islamic period, Buddhism was practised in several parts of the archipelago, 
particularly in Sumatra and Java, in the seventh and eighth centuries. In Buddhism we find the eight- 
petalled lotus, which in turn became a symbol of the eightfold path, which formed the fundamentals of the 
Buddha's teachings. Before the advent of Islam, the system of belief practised by the local population could 
be one that was either based on animism or one of the Indic religions (either Hinduism or Buddhism). 

Besides their application as signatures of the eight-year cycle, the huruf were also used for the purposes 
of magic and divination* in the Malay World. When placed in magic squares (wafaq), for example, they 
could be used to cure an illness. In divination, each particular year was believed to bring either good or 
bad weather, or good luck or misfortune. It was, for example, claimed that in an Alif year, heavy rain would 
fall; while the Ha year was marked by drought, which might even cause the death of many a young man. 
The Jim year would bring so much heat as well as strong winds where many people would be affected by 
illness. On the other hand, the Zay year would bring chilly weather and the rice fields would yield a good 
harvest, even though the year would also be marked by population unrest. The year of the early Dal would 
see widespread illness, conflicts and quarrels among the people, as well as torrential rain. The Ba year 
would see widespread drought, and many would be afflicted by sickness — however, many babies would be 
born. In the Waw year, the weather would be cool, but friction would occur among the people owing to 
their laxity in performing their religious duties to God. The year of the latter Dal would have less rainfall, 
but would yield a good harvest. But there would be a curse upon the people due to their failure in 
upholding the truth. 

The letter signature for a particular year would also be used to forecast certain events. For example, if 
an eclipse of the sun were to take place on Sunday in the month of Safar in an Alif year, that would signal 
the death of the Raja and acts of slander and calumny would abound; if on the other hand, it happened on 
a Saturday in the month of Rabi’ul-awal or Rabi’ul-akhir in the Ha year, war would break out, which 
would result in a shortage of food, although the country would be spared from destruction and no death 
would take place. 

The syncretistic trend that one notices in the practice of mysticism clearly shows that the early 
propagators of Islam were accommodating enough to maintain continuity with indigenous traditional 
beliefs and practices in order to gain new converts. That the religion was indeed spread in a gradual 
manner with much tolerance and without the use of any form of coercion was one reason why Islam in 
most parts of the Malay World was syncretistic in form and relatively peaceful in its dissemination. 

Before the adoption of the Malay-Muslim calendrical system that was based on the eight-year cycle, the 
Malay (and also Javanese) notion of time-reckoning was perceived in the context of a period of the cycle 
of five, called kutika lima (lit. five [ominous] times).’ Although the five-times-cycle was indigenous, the 
number five was nevertheless symbolic of the five distinguishing marks which, as mentioned in one of the 
Puranas, were supposed to represent creation, secondary creation, genealogy, the reigns of Manus® and 
the history of the patriarchs of the lunar and solar dynasties.’ Based on the notion of the kutika lima, the 
day was divided into five parts (namely sunrise, forenoon, noon, afternoon and sunset) and five days 
(from the first to the fifth) to form a cycle. In the beginning, the main purpose of time-reckoning was to 
determine the appropriate time for agricultural activities. For the Javanese, the kutika lima was for 
determining market days in the principal villages or districts. In the earlier days, each kutika was named 
after a Hindu deity from among the pantheon, whose names in the order of the five periods that made up 
the cycle were: Meswara or Maheswara (Shiva), Bisnu (Vishnu), Berhama (Brahma), Seri (Sri, wife of 
Vishnu) and Kala (or Kali, wife of Shiva).° 


48 


After the establishment of Islam, these names from the Hindu pantheon were substituted with the 
names of Ahmad (another name for the Prophet), Jibrail (Gabriel), Ibrahim (Abraham), Yusuf (Joseph), 
and Azrai'l (Azrael). The “Islamisation” of such names had also resulted in the five-times-cycle being 
called the Sa’at Lima, or Five Ominous Moments. In terms of purpose, the Sa’at Lima closely resembled 
that of the Kutika Lima, i.e. to interpret what were the good and bad days or times. The following chart 
illustrates the divisions of the cycle of five: 


Sunrise Forenoon Noon Afternoon Sunset 


Day1 Ahmad _ Jibrail Ibrahim Yusuf Azrael 
Day2 Jibrail Ibrahim Yusuf Azrael § Ahmad 
Day3 Ibrahim Yusuf Azrael Ahmad Jibra‘il 
Day4 Yusuf Azrael Ahmad Jibrail Ibrahim 
Day5 Azrael Ahmad _ Jibrail Ibrahim Yusuf 


Like in the Kutika Lima, the five days in the the Saat Lima were divided into five periods. When the chart 
was applied for the purpose of divination, it was known as tilek. Its implementation marked the 
beginning of astrology for the people of Southeast Asia. Good luck and misfortune depended on the 
specific day and time. For example, if one were to lose a buffalo or a bullock during the Ahmad division 
(which was at sunrise on the first day), the reading would be that the animal would have gone southward 
but would be recovered eventually; if good news was received, it would most likely be true; and any bad 
news received would likely be false. The moment (sa’at) would be an auspicious time for any kind of 
work, such as going on a voyage or sailing; it would also be profitable for planting rice as well as for 
trading. It would also be a good time for going to war - however, one needed to wear white clothes and 
face slightly south-east, and pray to God (Skeat, 1984: 548). Colour was also important, and continued the 
practice of associating the Hindu deities with colours. For example, Maheswara's colour was yellow-white, 
Vishnu's green, Brahmas red, Sri’s white and Kalas yellow-black (in a separate manuscript, Ali replaced 
Kala, and was associated with the colour black).’ 

As the spread of Islam became more extensive, the practice of inscribing the names of Hindu deities 
on magic squares was replaced by the introduction of magic squares with the letters of the Quranic 
alphabet (with their corresponding numerical values). These squares, which formed part of nujum in 
Malay magic, made use of numerals based on the mystic letters, or the names of God, angels, demons as 
well as those of the planets. The mystic letters or their numerical values were inserted into the magic 
square, and arranged so that the addition of horizontal, vertical and diagonal lines would give the same 
total. In the example below, in a magic square of five, the numbers totalled up from all directions 
(horizontal, vertical or diagonal lines) add up to 65. They could also be expressed by the mystic letters as 


shown below: 


17 24 1 8 15 
23 5 7 414 16 
4 6 13 20 22 


10 12 19 21 3 


49 


Further developments in Malay divination in various parts of the archipelago then led to the introduction 
of the Bintang Tujuh or Seven Heavenly Bodies, consisting of Zuhal (Saturn), Mushtari (Jupiter), Marikh 
(Mars), Syamsu (the Sun), Zuharat (Venus), ‘Utarid (Mercury), and Qamar (the Moon). These “planets” 
were believed to rule the seven ominous moments (kutika tujuh), and like the Bintang Dua Belas (the 
twelve constellations), their motions were prescribed by the agency of angels. The astrologers believed 
that the zodiac was divided into twelve equal parts or Houses. But curiously though, the Malay astrologers 
were only acquainted with the seven “planets”: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury and the 
Moon. It was only later, probably in the late seventeenth or eighteenth century, following the importation 
of Arabic texts on astronomy and astrology from the Middle East (which were subsequently copied in the 
Malay courts, such as that of Palembang) that the Bintang Dua Belas contained a more complete set of 
names (See Oxford MS Malay d.1). 

Similarly with the existing naming systems, these seven planets were also identified by signs of the 
zodiac: consisting of Hamal (the ram), Thaur (the bull), Jauza (turtle), Sartan (Crab or Cancer), Asad (the 
lion of the tribe of ‘Ali), Sanilah (sic, Sunbulah, the fox), and Mizan (the scale). Sometimes, in order to 
find one’s horoscope, or to identify the name of the animal for his or her star, the name of the person and 
his mother’s name (or vice versa) should be spelt out so that the numerical values of all the huruf could be 
counted, and the total divided by twelve. The remainder would then reveal his or her horoscope; number 
one would mean that his star was Hamal (the ram) whereas number two would indicate that it was Thaur 
(bullock), and so on. 

Letters from both the Arabic script and Malay abjad'’ were used in Malay magic, such as the 
interpretation of dreams and the making of charms and amulets. To interpret dreams, the initial letter of 
the principal subject in the dream should be identified. If the subject in the dream were to have Zay as its 
first letter, it would mean that the person who dreamt it would be visited by a woman of beauty and that he 
would receive a gift sent from another place. If the letter Lam was dreamt, then one was obliged to give 
alms to the poor. In the case of dreams, it seems that the letters were not restricted to the Arabic alphabet, 
but also included Malay-Jawi letters. This differs from the art of making of charms, which fully relied on 
both the letters in the Holy Qur’an and also the numerical values of the letters. These charms (including 
love charms) came in the form of diagrams (rajah), amulets or talismans (azimat) and they consisted of 
mystic letters, such as Alif Lam Mim, Alif Lam Ra, or Ya Sin and even short Qur'anic verses, or the sacred 
names of Allah, Muhamad, Ali etc. To most people in the Malay World, the belief in charms and amulets 
of various kinds was strong and persists today. Charms and amulets were considered helpful not only for 
making efforts such as warding off demons (syaitan), but also in making children breastfeed properly, and 
even preventing crops from being damaged by maggots, rats and wild boars (Skeat, 1984: 567). As late as 
the nineteenth century, it was a common belief among Muslims in both Malaysia and Indonesia, and 
perhaps also in the Philippines and Thailand, that invulnerability could be conferred upon by charms and 
amulets. This need was increasingly felt, especially in Indonesia and Malaysia, among those Muslims who 
took part in uprisings against the colonial powers. 

But the influence of the mystic letters in the Malay World was not restricted to the practices of 
divination, astrology and magic. At a higher plane, the mystic letters of the Qur’an also became a tool for 
Sufis to implant the spirit of religiosity among Muslims in the Malay Archipelago. 

In the history of Islamisation in Southeast Asia, there appeared to be a period when Indo-Persian 
elements were introduced, probably via India. It should be noted that in the sixteenth century, Persian- 
speaking merchants from the southern kingdom of the Deccan, where Shi’ism was strong, were already 
frequenting parts of Siam, the Malay peninsula and Sumatra. When exactly this influence appeared is still 
hard to say. But in the late sixteenth and seventeenth century, Malay texts, which were probably based on 
copies from an earlier period (as early as the fourteenth century, according to Brakel) strongly suggest that 
Indo-Persian influence did enter the Malay World, not only in the form of literature, which influenced the 
writing of classical Malay literary texts, but also Sufi treatises which certainly influenced 
contemporaneous (or earlier) Malay religious thinking. Thus, it was probably due to this kind of influence 


50 


that the notion of the Five Ominous Times was later accompanied by the symbol of the hand of Fatima, 
with the five fingers representing the panjitan, which included the names of Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatima, 
Hasan and Husayn. 

An example of Shi’ite influence on Malay belief can also be seen from the invocation in a manuscript 


that that reads: 


Tegang teguh urat aku; teguhlah mani dalam tubuh aku; Hai lah s[y]ahid, was-was ku tikam jua; menuang 
batu, tempakan hamba besi kursani akan tuang; tuang kalam aku gagah; gagahaku seperti Ali, kuat ku sa ku 
[sic] seperti ‘Ali; berkat do’a putaran puting beliung; hagh sir Saidi, berkat do’a pengajaran guruku yang sah; 
berkat La ilaha ‘“illa’Llah. (Stiff and tense are my veins, so let the sperm be robust in my body, O martyr, with 
anxiety do I pierce, cast me a stone; wrought me a metal of iron; decant this dick of mine for strength; as 
gallant as Ali, so that my strength is as potent as Ali's; thanks to the cycle of petition of the whirlwind; the 
secret truth Sir, by the blessing of the teaching of my rightful teacher; by dint of La ila ha’illa’Llah 
Muhammadar’rasulu’Llah). 


Manuscripts which were largely copied in Malay between the late sixteenth and nineteenth centuries have 
shown that the Malay World had been acquainted with Sufism, especially in the late sixteenth century, 
when the great Malay philosopher from Aceh, Hamzah Fansuri (d. 1590 CE) played a major role in 
disseminating the concept of wahdat al-wujud (unity of being), the doctrine that many scholars attributed 
to Ibn Arabi. It was at this point in time that the debate on God's transcendence and the relationship 
between Him and His creations generated lengthy polemics in Aceh and drew adherents from places as 
far away as Patani and Buton. It is interesting to note that after more than half a century of intense 
discussion by the followers of Hamzah, especially Shamsuddin of Pasai (a.k.a. Shamsuddin al-Sumatrai, d. 
1630 CE) and his successor, Shaikh Kamaluddin Ashi, an Indian Sufi from Randir called Syekh Nuruddin 
bin Ali bin Hasanji bin Muhammad Hamid (d. 1658, also known as Nuruddin ar-Raniri) arrived in Aceh 
in 1637 and was elected by Iskandar II (r. 1636-41) to be the Shaikh al Islam. It seemed that following the 
death of Shamsuddin, Kamaluddin had allowed the teachings of the wahdat al-wujud and the martbat 
tujuh (the seven grades of existence), intertwined with the doctrine of Nur Muhammad (the 
Muhammadan light), to be spread all over the country to the point that the sanctity of the Shar’ia was 
threatened - this eventually drew the wrath of ar-Raniri, who brought it to the attention of Iskandar II. 
Despite the lengthy debates on the matter, it seemed that Shaikh Kamaluddin refused to repent and this 
resulted in his execution by the ruler and the confiscation and burning of works on the wahdat al-wujud. 
It was within this context of religious schisms that the mystic letters of the Qur'an were applied to provide 
a reinterpretation of the doctrine of the unity of existence. 

In a manuscript authored by ar-Raniri himself, the mystical properties of each letter of the Holy Quran 
were explained with the purpose of providing a supposedly correct interpretation of the meanings of the 
seven grades of existence, as espoused by the doctrine of wahdat al-wujud. In his treatise, ar-Raniri wrote, 
for example, that Alif was the signature of God, the divine grade of existence; Ba was the signature for the 
grade of wahda, with the dot signifying the Reality of Muhammad; Ta was the signature for the second 
tajalli (emanation) and the two dots signified that Allah's presence was not on the “Arash, throne or 
heaven; neither was He on earth, nor in the bodies of men. In his description of the letter Mim, Syekh 
Nuruddin ar-Raniri wrote: “Regarding the letter Mim, it signifies that the Reality [Hakikat] of 
Muhammad does not contain the light (Nur) of Muhammad, and that it was Gabriel who brought the 
divine revelation to Muhammad”."’ 

It is clear that by elucidating the mystical properties of each letter of the Qur’an, ar-Raniri, who was 
very much determined to stamp out the influence of what he perceived as an anti-Shari’a movement, 
espoused by those whom, so he claimed, had misconceptions about the doctrine of the unity of being and 
the light of Muhammad. By declaring them as kufr and by having their leaders killed, ar-Raniri believed 
that he had indeed tried to curb the spread of what was considered as heretical doctrines. He did it, so it 
seemed, by carrying out a spiritual cleansing in Aceh before he was expelled in 1643. 

Nuruddin ar-Raniri’s fear of the declining influence of the Shari’a in Aceh was not without foundation, 


51 


since he saw that the religiosity of the Acehnese was being undermined by their distorted understanding 
of the wahdat al-wujud. Since the ideas about the existence of God and His essence were expounded upon 
by Ibn ‘Arabi through the allusions he made to the twenty letters of the Qur‘an, it must have also dawned 
upon ar-Raniri to make use of the letters in order to clarify the essence of God and His existence. Later, 
sometime in the last quarter of the seventeenth century, another prominent ulama of Aceh, Syekh Abdul 
Rauf al-Sinkil (1615-93 CE), even saw it appropriate to use the title “Dakaik al-Huruf” (the details of the 
Letters) in his commentary about the wahdat al-wujud. 


Conclusion 


From the above discussion it becomes clear that Islamisation in the Malay world was influenced by the 
mystic letters of the Qur’anic alphabet. While at some stage the letters became useful to the Malays, 
Javanese and others in their practice of divination, magic and their understanding of the occult and 
astrology, the letters also became a useful formula in the effort to spread the teaching of Islam through 
mysticism. 


' See the discussion on the “Mystic Letters of the Koran” by Arthur Jeffrey in The Muslim World (13), 1924. 
* See Ahmat Adam (2017). Syed Naguib Al-Attas (1970) is wrong in his reading of the date as 1303. He had missed the word 


/lapan/ [ oly ] (eight) which is a continuation of the words “tujuh ratus dua” inscribed on the left-hand corner of the stone. 
“Dua lapan” is the Old Malay word for “eight”. 

> See Mohamed Haj Yousef, Ibn ‘Arabi-time and Cosmology, Routledge, 2008: 81-84. 

* Emilie Savage-Smith makes the distinction that while magic seeks to alter the course of events, usually by calling upon a 
superhuman force (that is, God or one of His intercessors), divination (kihana) attempts to predict future events, or gain 
information about things unseen without the intention of altering them (2004: xiii). 

> Under this system the day is divided into five parts, and five days forms a cycle. 

* Manus (plural form of Manu), the collective progenitors of the human race, usually referred to as “the Manus”. See W. H. 
Johnson, Oxford Dictionary of Hinduism, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009: 199. 

” Tbid., 229. 

® Besides the Kutika Lima, the above names from the Hindu pantheon were also inscribed in magic squares of five for magical 
purposes. 

> See the manuscript (which unfortunately is partly torn and in a bad state) that is bound to MSS 260, kept at the National 
Library, Malaysia. 

'° The Malay alphabet is based on the Arabic, which has been adapted to accommodate Malay phonemes. 

" The attempt to explain the concepts of unity of existence and the Reality of Muhammad was also made through the syair 
called Syair Hijiyya (poem of letters). Through the poem, the anonymous author analysed the meaning inherent in the letters 
that make up the name of the Prophet Muhammad. 


a2 


Orientalism and traditional Malay literature 


The Malay Annals and traditional Malay literature 


The Sejarah Melayu, has been known by many names. Originally known as the Sulalat u’s-Salatin, yakni 
pituturan segala raja-raja, it was this title by which it was originally known in the ancient Malay courts. It 
was also known as the Hikayat Melayu in the nineteenth century and eventually erroneously translated 
into English as the Malay Annals. It is the only other surviving text - besides the Hikayat Raja Pasai - of 
the earliest Malay literary works and has been regarded as the finest and most famous of all the Malay 
classics. Over five centuries it has undergone several editions, interpolations and revisions by alleged 
authors, copyists or court writers, thus resulting in no less than 44 manuscripts (both complete and 
incomplete) of the Sejarah Melayu worldwide. Looking at the principal theme that runs through its 
narratives, there is little doubt that the original author(s) intended to narrate the fortunes and misfortunes 
that befell the Malay Rajas of the Melaka line. 

It was written with the purpose of providing a memorial for the Malay Rajas, and the genealogy of the 
Melaka Sultans together with a chronicle of the Malay royal ceremonials. Underlying all these was the 
subtle instructional advice for Malay Rajas of the folly of departing from the ancient covenant between 
Demang Lebar Daun and Sang Supraba (Sri Tri Buana), which underscored the responsibilities between 
subjects and rulers. 


Authorship of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin 


Until now, the authorship of the manuscript and the date of its original composition is unresolved. Many 
believe that it was written in Johor in 1612 by Tun Seri Lanang, who is listed as the “author” of almost all 
manuscripts of the Malay Annals (with the exception of the Raffles 18 and the incomplete Cod. Or. 1704 at 
the library of the University of Leiden). While the Bendahara Paduka Raja (Jelani, 2009: 60, 158) was 
mentioned as the “author” of the Malay Annals by Nuruddin ar-Raniri in Bustanus-Salatin, which the 
latter began to write in 1638, there is no clear evidence that Tun Seri Lanang was the author of the 1612 
recension. Tun Seri Lanang was in fact just the copyist of one version of the Sejarah Melayu. Despite the 
inclusion of his name in all later revisions of the Malay Annals, other copyists had nevertheless retained 
the part in the preface of the Raffles 18 which stated that Seri Nara Wangsa, named Tun Bambang, was 
tasked to “make a chronicle of the genealogy of the Malay Raja” (Raffles 18: preface). 


When was the Sejarah Melayu revised? 


In his 1938 work, Sir Richard Winstedt tried to give the correct date of the rewriting of the Sejarah 
Melayu. He pointed out that the Raffles 18 is the only manuscript providing the correct name of the 
Hegira year of 1021, which was a Dal Awal, and also the correct day of the week, which was Sunday, 12 
Rabi ul-awal (13 May 1612). But is the Raffles 18 a copy of the oldest draft? E W. Douglas, who used to 
possess two manuscripts of the Malay Annals (presumed destroyed by the bombing of the Selangor 
Museum in 1945) had pointed out that the earliest edition was dated 12 Rabiulawal 1020 H (25 May 
1611). This edition was written at Pekan Tuha (Douglas, 1941: 34). Pekan Tuha was the place where 
‘Alauddin Riayat Syah, son of Sultan Mahmud Syah, resided. It is worth noting that Munsyi Mohamad 
Ally’s manuscript (MS. 86 DBP) and the Malay MS. 1 of the John Rylands Library in Manchester, which 
also bear Tun Seri Lanang’s name, also show this date: 12 Rabi ul-awal 1020 Hegira (25 May 1611) which 
was a Ha year. It is earlier than the 1612 date. However, the 1020 AH (1611 CE) date raises the question of 
whether this is the correct date of the Malay Annals being revised, and not 1021 AH (1612 CE).’ 


ae. 


Incidentally, the date 12 Rabiul-awal 1021 AH would correctly fall on a Sunday, and not Thursday, as 
given by all other copies that list Tun Seri Lanang’s name as the author-editor. Thus one may question why 
12 Rabiul-awal was chosen even though it could be of a different year. The answer lies in the fact that 
until today, Sunni Muslims recognise this date as the birth date of the Prophet Muhammad, irregardless of 
it falling on a Sunday or a Thursday. 


Orientalism and early studies of the Sejarah Melayu 


Several generations since its first narration, the Malay Annals (which came to be popularly known as the 
Sejarah Melayu since the early nineteenth century), had undergone changes when so-called authors or 
copyists of later years had interpolations weaved into the original narrative. These recensions were first 
produced by European Orientalists* whose studies peaked between the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries. The first Orientalist to have studied the Sejarah Melayu, however, was Father Francois Valentyn 
(1666-1727), who served the Dutch Reformed Church in the Dutch East Indies in the late seventeenth 
and early eighteenth centuries. From his study of the Sejarah Melayu, Valentyn became exposed to the 
narratives of the Melaka sultanate which led him to propose the date of the founding of Melaka as 1252 
CE, by merely backtracking the reigns of the various Sultans of Melaka. It was also Valentyn who had 
correctly read the alleged name of the Melakan Laksamana as “Hang Tuha’, based on the Jawi spelling 
/ta/waw/ha [ °#].3 

Since the time of Valentyn, Europeans have found themselves fascinated by written works of 
traditional Malay literature, especially the Sejarah Melayu. Students of this literature are therefore quite 
familiar with names like Petrus van der Vorm (1677), John Leyden (1810), Edouard Dulaurier (1849), 
William Shellabear (1896) C. O. Blagden (1925) and Sir Richard Winstedt (1938). Winstedt was the last 
and probably greatest colonial scholar of Malay traditional literature. All these scholars of the east appear 
to fit in with the definition of “Orientalists” given by Edward Said, who attempted to show that they were 
not only engaged in an abstract, scholarly phase by trying to understand other cultures, but were also 
engaged in the making of an imperialist tradition to be adopted by the people whom they colonised. 


What is Orientalism? 


According to Edward Said,* Orientalists had already been engaged in a process called Orientalism since 
the early nineteenth century, which converted the so-called “Orient” into a legitimate area of study, of 
which the West could make authoritative statements. European Orientalism, be it German, British or 
French, soon emerged to become a kind of intellectual authority over the “Orient” within Western culture 
(Said 1978: 19).° In other words, Orientalism in the West is the cultural framework within which tangible 
racism is practised against Asian people. This definition by Said needs to be viewed in the context of 
nineteenth century colonial Malaya, when indigenous scholars of traditional Malay literature were not 
yet present. Thus, the first person to transcribe the Jawi text of the Raffles 18 into Romanised Malay was 
not a Malay, but Winstedt himself in 1938. It was he who asserted that the Raffles 18 version of the Sejarah 
Melayu was the “oldest” written version of the work.° He even claimed that the manuscript discovered by 
Blagden was in fact part of the long version of the Raffles 18. Both claims of his are recognised by most 
Malay scholars today and several of them have even transliterated this particular version of the Sejarah 
Melayu, based on Winstedt’s model. 

The Raffles 18, which is also called the 1536 version, was copied in the early nineteenth century. Its 
text ends with the narrative about the murder of Patih Ludang.’ However, this narrative and several others 
(beginning with the twenty-fourth and ending with the thirty-first narrative) are transplants taken from 
the Blagden manuscript by Winstedt. They continue the story beyond the killing of Tun Ali Hati in the 
standard version of the Sulalat us-Salatin,. This part of the Raffles 18 shares similarities with the 
manuscript owned by Sultan Abdul Rahman Syah of Lingga.® 


54 


Based on my own comparative study of the content structure of several manuscripts of the Sulalat u’s- 
Salatin, I have come to the conclusion that with the exception of the extended (or long) version of the 
Sulalat u's-Salatin, most of the varied copies of the manuscript hew towards a standard version. Unknown 
by many scholars, the Krusenstern MS mentioned earlier is a prototype of the standard version. 

Because of their many similarities, I consider that both the Krusenstern MS and the Raffles 18 were 
copied from two different texts, but have a common master text.” As to when the master text of the 
“genealogy of Sultans’ was written, no one can authenticate the exact date, even though Winstedt 
suggested that the original copy was likely to have been written by a polyglot who had witnessed for 
himself the events leading to the conquest of Melaka by the Portuguese.” 

In his study of traditional Malay literature and culture, Winstedt had time and again over-emphasised 
the role of Indian cultural and literary factors in influencing Malay art forms, cultural values and 
traditional literature. His statement that “[a]nyone who surveys the field of Malay literature will be struck 
by the amazing abundance of the foreign flora and the rarity of indigenous work” has irked many a Malay 
scholar who views such a sweeping statement as irrational for a scholar of his stature. In his mind, 
Winstedt viewed the Malays as passing through three distinct historical phases, namely; the primitive stage 
symbolised by the Shaman; the Hinduistic stage symbolised by Saiva; and the Islamic stage symbolised by 
the Sufi. While part of the statement regarding the borrowing and adaptation of foreign influences is 
probably true, Winstedt’s rigid compartmentalisation nevertheless appeared to have ignored the obvious 
creative ingenuity of the Malay people (Ismail Hussein 1966: 78). Not surprisingly, Malays of the younger 
generation have not held back from describing him as an Orientalist of the highest order. 

Nonetheless, as pointed out by the late Professor Ismail Hussein, it cannot be denied that Winstedt’s 
work, which became the basis and the starting point for the study of Malay literature, has a special place in 
the history of Orientalism and the study of traditional Malay literature. In a period where no native 
scholars of equal repute existed, where no one possessed similar levels of extensiveness and depth in terms 
of understanding Malay culture and literature, it must be admitted that the Orientalist stand taken by 
scholars like Winstedt was unavoidable. As a matter of fact, even today one can still find Malay scholars 
echoing his and other European Orientalists opinions in evaluating works such as the Sejarah Melayu 
and Hikayat Raja Pasai. Winstedt's claim that the Hikayat Raja Pasai was recopied in 1230 AH or 1814 
CE has been repeated by most people, including Malays, even though the date is wrong."' Winstedt, 
however, was quite correct when he said that the Hikayat Raja Pasai had served as a model for the author 
of the Sejarah Melayu, who had paraphrased and quoted its contents. To Winstedt, the Hikayat Raja Pasai 
once again demonstrated the Indian influence found in traditional Malay literature (Winstedt 1938: 26). 

Before the Second World War, Malay writers would turn to Winstedt for references to traditional 
Malay literature. Therefore, not many realised the significance of Kawi in the Sulalat us-Salatin since 
Orientalists like Winstedt did not pay attention. Even regarding recent discussions of the Jawi script 
found on the Terengganu Inscription of 1308 CE, both Orientalists and Malay scholars failed to notice 
the presence of several Old Javanese words inscribed on the stone (Ahmat Adam 2017: 44-50). For 
example, based on my study of the Krusenstern MS, I am quite convinced that the senior prince in 
Narrative 2 of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin, who landed with his brothers on Bukit Siguntang, is not called Sang 
Sapurba, Si Parba or Saparba, but Sang Supraba (a Kawi word adapted from Sanskrit which means “very 
bright or splendid’, “glorious’, or “having a good appearance”. “Supraba” is also another name for the 
Buddha,” and he is said to be the ninth incarnation of Vishnu. Also known as Bichitram (from the 
Sanskrit “Vicitra’) his emergence at Bukit Siguntang is accompanied by two other princes, all of them 
claiming descent from Raja Iskandar (Alexander the Great), king of the world.’ These divine 
personalities were identified as merely individuals and not by religion, clearly showing that the unknown 
author of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin had no intention of projecting the prior establishment of Buddhism or any 
of the Vishnavite systems of belief in a Malay region. In the same line of thinking, the said author 
renamed Parameswazra, the first ruler of Melaka, as Iskandar Syah, or Alexander the Great. 


55 


Iskandar Dhu’I-Qarnayn and Sang Supraba in the Sejarah Melayu 


On several occasions I have mentioned that the Sulalat u’s-Salatin is a work of myth, fiction and at most 
only part history of the genealogy of the Malay Rajas, which starts by introducing the character of 
Iskandar Dhu’l-Qarnayn, who appears in the Holy Qur'an and the Hikayat Iskandar Dhu'l-Qarnayn as 
ruler of the East and West - who became the alter ego of Sang Supraba, Seri Tri Buana, Nila Pahlawan, 
Bichitram Syah and Sang Nila Utama. All these characters were said to be founders of the Malay kingdoms 
of Minangkabu, Tanjung Pura, Bentan, Tumasik or Singapura and Melaka, and their genealogy was 
uninterrupted even after the Portuguese invasion, when the royals established themselves in Johor. It was 
during the reign of Sultan ‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah in Johor Lama when a request was made to rewrite the 
copy of the Sejarah Melayu. 

By renaming the first ruler of Melaka after the legendary Dhul Qarnayn, the author of the Sejarah 
Melayu implied that Parameswara did convert to Islam” just before his death in 1413 or 1414. For the 
author of the Sejarah Melayu the name Iskandar was symbolic of a perfect Muslim. Most commentators of 
the Qur'an consider Dhu'l-Qarnayn to be a righteous king who was granted miraculous means for 
conquering the world, and was spoken to directly by God (verse 86 of Surah al-Kahf).’° In the author's 
imagination, he made Dhul-Qarnayn the great ancestor of the Malay kings. 


The subtitle of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin 


As was mentioned earlier, the Sejarah Melayu’s original title is Sulalat u'’s-Salatin yakni Pituturan Segala 
Raja-Raja. While most scholars who have worked on the Sejarah Melayu are quite familiar with its title in 
Arabic, few could really transliterate the Kawi word “pituturan” in Jawi [ 624 ] correctly, which is key to 
understanding the text. Thus for over two centuries people have misread the sentence in the opening 
chapter of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin as quoted by Winstedt, “Bahawa hamba minta diperbuatkan hikayat 
pada Bendahara, peraturan (with the original words in Jawi placed in brackets: [ Cs a gia a ]) segala 
raja-raja Melayu dengan istiadatnya ...” 

Indeed, the original words used were actually “pada hari pituturan segala raja-raja Melayu’. The Kawi 
phrase “pada hari” had been misread by many transliterators as “pada Bendahari’, who assumed that this 
was a misspelling. As stated earlier, the sentence should really have been translated as “I request that a 
chronicle be composed to address the younger brothers and distant relatives of various stations and ranks 
with soothing words for all Malay Rajas and their ceremonials for remembrance so that our descendants 
will hear them and memorialise every word of it?’® The mistake in the reading and hence the 
transliteration of this Javanese sentence in the Sulalat u'’s-Salatin seems to have continued for over a long 
period of time. Even local Malay scholars have never bothered to question the accuracy of the 
transliteration of the Old Javanese words by the Orientalists. Due to the unquestioning acceptance of the 
Orientalists writings by Malay scholars, the latter have failed to rectify the mistakes made by the former in 
their reading and interpretation of traditional Malay literature. 


Traditional Malay literature in the context of Nusantara culture 


That the study of traditional Malay literature cannot be isolated from Javanese influence had already been 
pointed out by the late Professor Ismail Hussein in his landmark lecture to members of the Malaysian 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1966. Ismail mentioned that when discussing traditional Malay 
literature, it must be placed within the context of a wider Nusantara culture. Winstedt’s attempt to avoid 
the Nusantara-centric treatment of Malay works such as the Malay Ramayana and Mahabharata, which 
were produced when Java had a role in the propagation of Hindu culture, will bring no benefit to the 
study of traditional Malay classics. Logically, this should also apply to works such as the Sejarah Melayu. 
One should not forget that there were a large number of Javanese who were ever present in the Malay 
courts along the Straits of Melaka. By classifying Malay literature as having a “Javanese element’, and by 


56 


claiming that the Hikayat Hang Tuha “was an inspired piece modelled opon the Panji Tales and 
supplemented by Indian elements’, Winstedt is actually denying the local genius factor in producing such 
works (Ismail Hussein 1966: 79). This writer agrees with Ismail’s proposition that a philological approach 
should be adopted to study traditional Malay literature, namely textual reconstruction, interpretation and 
analysis (ibid.). But because the Jawi script used in the Malay texts does not have the proper vowel system, 
scholars will need to read several different versions of such works. It is only by making a comparison of 
the various texts that one realises, for example, that the word “pecah” (to break) found in the sentence “... 
sekaliannya dipecahkannya sarongnya [sic]”'’ (Winstedt 1938: 105) has been wrongly read by most 
transliterators, including C.C. Brown, who claimed that this meant the “creeses” (keris) were broken. In 
fact, the word is actually “pecat’, which in Kawi means “to unsheathe’. 

Another misreading by the copyists is the word “pergonjaklah” which in Kawi means “to jest’, “tease” 
or “to make jokes”. All the transcribers and copyists have misread it as “perkejanglah” (Ibrahim Kandu 
1812: 3), “perkunjalah” (Muhammad Tajuddin Tamby Hitam (Or. 14734, 1873: 3), “berguncanglah” 
(Winstedt 1938: 42) and “pergoncanglah” or “perkejutlah” (Abdullah Munsyi 1841: 5; Situmorang and 
Teeuw 1952: 2) and Shellabear (1957: 3). As a result, Malay transliterators variously read the word as 
“perkejutlah” (A. Samad Ahmad 1986: 3), “kencanglah” (Muhammad Haji Salleh 1997: 4), and 
“goncanglah” (Abdul Rahman Ismail 2009: 66). Another common Kawi word found in the Sejarah 
Melayu is the word “Agra” (from Sanskrit, meaning “best”, “first”, “chief”, “foremost” or “prominent”) 
which has been transcribed by almost all transcribers from Jawi to Rumi as “Akar”, as in the name “Sri 
Akar Raja’ which should rightly be pronounced as “Sri Agra Raja’. There are in fact numerous other Kawi 
words, such prastawa, karunia, Malini, Empu (which is written as “Empuk” in the Sejarah Melayu), 
Sundari, Megat, and hwan (read as “Wan”) which are either borrowed from Sanskrit or are of Javanese 
origins. The inability of many transliterators in reading the Old Jawi script, because of its inconsistency 
in terms of the vowelling system, was a problem for most readers and transcribers. Hence there was a 
tendency for copyists to either change the words or interpolate them whenever it suited them. 

Having carefully studied the contents, language and structure of the Krusenstern MS, I personally 
think that it is the second oldest copy of the text in existence after the Raffles 18, but the oldest to be 
copied for a European. Copied in 1798 by three Melaka copyists, it shares similarities with the one 
introduced by Abdullah Munsyi, published by a mission press in Singapore around 1841/42. It may also 
have been the text (or a similar one) copied by Raffles clerk, Ibrahim Kandu, which was then translated 
by John Leyden. It is for this reason that this writer thinks that to do justice to the discussion on the 
origins and authorship of the Malay Annals, several variants of the text would need to be studied. While 
the Shellabear redaction (1896) has been the most widely read text, it is merely a hybrid, for the “reviser” 
had indeed relied on several sources for his recension (Linehan, 1947: 105). 

The late Professor Roolvink has categorised the texts of the Malay Annals into two prototypes: the short 
(standard) and long versions, which this writer explained earlier. Several versions end with the narrative 
about the killing of Tun Ali Hati and the Portuguese invasion, including the Krusenstern MS, texts which 
relied on the Abdullah redaction, Raffles 76, Raffles 80, Farquhar 5 and the manuscript from Palembang 
(Reinhold Rost, 1887: 17; Roolvink, 1967: 308-309). The said chapter is also found in both the Raffles 18 
and the Shellabear text. In the Shellabear redaction, however, like the Leiden Cod. Or. 12026 and other 
copies of its kind (the extended version), further episodes have been included and the text ends with a 
narrative on the ascension of Raja Ali to the throne of Johor and the attack on Johor by Jambi, which 
occurred in 1673 [1083 AH] (Ismail Hussein, 1979: 191). 

The question that Roolvink raised viz. whether the short version had formed the basis of the Raffles 18 
is an interesting one. I think that its copyist, had in 1612 incorporated the Blagden manuscript (that is, the 
eight stories which formed the last eight narratives of the Raffles 18) with the original standard version. 
These last chapters enlarged the original version to cover events that took place prior to 1535/36. As 
stated earlier, this writer suspects that the Krusenstern MS and the Raffles 18 share the same master text. 
This writer thinks that the narratives in the Krusenstern MS were later endorsed by later redactors or 


Sf 


copyists of the Malay Annals to be used as a basis for their texts, and then interpolated them with other 
episodes.'® 


The essence of Orientalism 


It was due to the problem of reading Old Jawi that many Orientalists have, until today, failed to 
transliterate the the Sejarah Melayu correctly. But being Orientalists who, as described by Edward Said, 
are Europeans using the “academic” label, “usually see, imagine, emphasize, exaggerate and distort 
differences between the Arab (read Asian) people and cultures as compared to Europeans and 
Americans. With regard to the study of traditional Malay literature: in the nineteenth century, when 
British colonialism was at its peak, the colonial officers (who became scholars of Malay “studies”) looked 
upon the Malays and the Malay region as different and inferior, and therefore needed Western 
intervention or “rescue”. This hegemonic attitude appears to demonstrate “the essence of ‘Orientalism’, 
which is “the ineradicable distinction between Western superiority and Oriental inferiority” (Said 1978: 
42). Thus it is difficult to deny the fact that Orientalism and post-colonialism in general still, in some 
ways, continue to encourage Eurocentrism. Non-Western problems are structured within a Western 
framework and do not actually draw attention to the issue at hand. “Orientalism” can also refer to a 
general patronising Western attitude even if that attitude emanates from a deep ignorance of the basic 
traits of “traditional Malay literature”. This patronising attitude can still be seen today, as demonstrated by 
a French academician by the name of Henri Chambert-Loir; who pretends to be an expert “scholar” of the 
Malay language, culture and literature. Chambert-Loir certainly fits into Said’s definition of “the 
Orientalist” viz. anyone who teaches, writes about, or researches the Orient in terms of its specific or 
general aspects — regardless of their own professional discipline (Edward Said 1978: 2). 


Chambert-Loir and contemporary Orientalism 


In a disparaging review” of this writer's book, Sulalat u’s-Salatin, which is based on a critical study of the 
Krusenstern MS, Chambert-Loir assumes that the recension that this writer edited was merely a 
transcription of a manuscript corrected by me - “according to [my] taste, [my] knowledge and [my] 
hypotheses, most often without any consideration for the readings of other editions, other than to declare 
them faulty” (see p. 216 of his review). Chambert-Loir is troubled by my criticisms of Western editors of 
the Sejarah Melayu, especially my new interpretative reading of the Sulalat us-Salatin which is admittedly 
quite different from the usual and conventional reading by the European Orientalists. He pays close 
attention to my criticism of Revunenkovas Russian edition of the Sejarah Melayu, even though the 
contents had been spelt out to me by Dr Victor Pogadaev, an associate professor of the Russian language 
who was then teaching Russian at the University of Malaya. Chambert-Loir was critical of my description 
of the Russian author's knowledge of Jawi as “deficient” even though she has wrongly transliterated the 
name of the Majapahit princess “Purna Lango” as “Kirana Langu’. Dr Revunenkova has also stated that 
there are thirty-four narratives (instead of the correct thirty, which symbolises the thirty chapters of the 
Qur'an). The structure of the chapters in her work followed the order set by Shellabear. For example, even 
the story about the duel between Hang Tuha and Hang Kesturi is placed in Narrative 16, even though the 
episode should rightly be incorporated into Narrative 12, which depicts the visit of Sultan Mansur Syah to 
Majapahit (See Sulalat us-Salatin 2016: xc-xci). On p. 212 of his review, Chambert-Loir takes issue over 
my not commenting on Dr Revunenkova's essay which she published in the Manuscripta Orientalia vol. 
12: 2 (2006). He has no reason to do so actually, because firstly I found no new information in the said 
article, and secondly because Chambert-Loir has not read Dr Revunenkova'’s book himself and has never 
made any effort to enquire about the contents of the book. Thus, he is only assuming that Dr Revunenkova 
has “studied the text in a careful and competent way” (see p. 312 of his review). These assumptions seem 
to tally with Edward Said’s labelling of European Orientalism as “consequently a racist, an imperialist and 


58 


almost totally ethnocentric” doctrine. 

From his review, it is clear that Chambert-Loir does not have a strong grasp of Old Jawi. For example, 
he is ignorant of the way the word Bota or Bhuta (a demon) should be spelt. For over two centuries 
European Orientalists wrongly pronounced the word spelt in Jawi as /ba-ta/ [ 5 ], as “Bat”, and 
Chambert-Loir strongly disagrees with my reading method of the Jawi script, which differs from most 
European conventions, including his. He disagrees with my assertion that the reading of the Jawi letters 
/ba/ta/ [ 4] should be pronounced Bota because of the letter /ta/ with a fathah. “Bota” or “Bhuta” is from 
the Sanskrit “bhuta”, and it is also found in Kawi. 

Chambert-Loir’s counter-argument hinged on the use of the Arabic diacritical marks fathah and 
shaddah, which he doesn’t seem to fully understand. Shaddah is a diacritic shaped like a small written /w/. 
It is used to indicate germination (consonant doubling or pronounced with extra length such as the 
doubling of [ t ] as in the word bhatta). He doesn’t seem to know that in the case of [ 4 ] in the spelling 
/b/ t/ [ # ], it has a fathah (the small diagonal line placed above a letter). Due to this, the correct reading 
of the word is “bota” since the fathah on the letter [ 4 ] represents a short /a/. Like the Old Jawi spelling 
for “duli” which is spelt /d/1/ [ J4 ] that is, without the vowel /u/, there is also no vowel after the consonant 
/ba/. Thus the spelling of /b/t/ [ ~ ] should obviously be read as /bhuta/ or /bota/. However, Chambert- 
Loir insists that the Jawi spelling should be read as “Bat”, which comes from the Sanskrit bhatta (p. 219) 
which, according to him (quoting van Ronkel), means “the erudite, the bard”. This definition was not 
found in any of the Sanskrit dictionaries that I use. Has he really quoted van Ronkel correctly? I wonder. 
According to the Sanskrit-English Dictionary by Sir William Monier-Williams (1999, first edition 1872), 
“bhatta” is a title of respect addressed to a prince, such as “My Lord’; whereas “bhata” means “a 
mercenary, hired soldier or warrior, hireling, or servant”. The word “bhuta” (or Malay “bota”) on the 
other hand, according to Monier- Williams, means “priest of the gods, purified divine being; good being, a 
created thing, a spirit (good or evil), or a great devotee or ascetic ghost, goblin or demon”. In Malay, 
“bhuta” or “bota” is called “raksasa”. 

As an Orientalist, Chambert-Loir has also revealed his ignorance of the Malay language and Jawi 
spelling when he picks on issues of orthography (such as disputing my assertion that the copy of the 
Krusenstern MS is of good quality). But Chambert-Loir's definition of a “good quality” manuscript is 
subjective. He thinks that as a whole the quality of the copying of the Krusenstern MS is mediocre (p. 
214). I presume that he is judging it based on the handwriting of one or two of the manuscript’s scribes, 
which I described as “careless and negligent in certain places”. But unlike Chambert-Loir, I maintain that 
the copying of the Krusenstern MS is on the whole of good quality because I do not consider the 
preservation of the Kawi words by the scribe(s) as contributing to the manuscript’s mediocrity. On the 
contrary, the adroitness of the scribes of the Krusenstern MS, compared to the scribe of the Raffles 18, in 
copying accurately the non-Malay words (just as they did with the Ciri) is a big help to readers and 
transliterators alike. In comparison, the Raffles 18 scribe fails to read the Acehnese word “gogalah” 
correctly (from the Persian “gogah”), meaning “tumult”, or “din”), and this consequently led Winstedt to 
transcribe it as “ngunglah”, while Shellabear read it as “gemparlah” and Abdul Rahman Ismail as 
“ngeranglah”. The scribe of the Raffles 18 also glaringly miscopied the Old Javanese word “gonjaklah” as 
/k/n/f{/n/\/h/ which prompted Winstedt to read it as “berguncanglah”, Shellabear as “perkejutlah”, and 
Abdul Rahman Ismail as well as Muhammad Haji Salleh as “goncanglah”. Meanwhile the word “amerta” 
(from Sanskrit “amrta” meaning “immortal”) has also been wrongly transcribed as “amarat” by both 
Winstedt and Brown. 

Since Chambert-Loir has probably not read the Jawi original of the Raffles 18 in its entirety, he is 
obviously not aware that many Kawi words have been misread or left out by the scribe or the editors who 
worked on it. From Chambert-Loir’s perusal of the Krusenstern MS, I deduce that that he has not read the 
facsimile when he tries to excuse himself by saying that: “I suppose nobody in the world, not even in 
Malaysia, will choose to read the Jawi text in its original form rather than the Latin transcription any 
more” (see p. 212 of his review). I think that this is the main cause of his failure to write a fair and 


59 


objective review of my edition of the Sulalat us-Salatin. 

Furthermore, by describing portions of some pages of the Krusenstern MS as “mediocre’, he only 
exhibits his ignorance of Jawi and that he is unable to compare the quality of copying by the scribe of the 
Raffles 18 with that of the Krusenstern MS. Granted, the script on f. ii-f. ii: 2, and f. x of the latter shows 
that the Jawi letters are larger than the normal size; nonetheless, I still find it quite legible for reading. My 
comments on the irregularity of the Jawi spelling on p. xcvii are certainly apt as the Krusenstern MS was 
copied by three scribes and spelling errors or inconsistencies are expected; for example, one may find the 
word /mengadap/ being spelt differently by another scribe as /mengadab/ since his ethnic background 
was most probably Javanese. But one cannot conclude, as Chambert-Loir has done, that the quality of the 
whole manuscript is mediocre — especially by someone who does not know how to read Jawi that well and 
likely can’t even write Jawi. Chambert-Loir’s failure to read the Jawi script of the work properly has indeed 
prevented him from comprehending its full contents. He also forgets that while the Jawi script of the 
Raffles 18 looks neater, the manuscript’s scribe makes more spelling errors than the scribes of the 
Krusenstern MS, thus indicating that the former's quality of copying the Raffles 18 is poorer when 
compared to the scribes of the Krusenstern MS. The problem with Chambert-Loir is that he apparently 
thinks that the Raffles 18 is the perfect copy of the Malay Annals and he expects the scribes of the 
Krusenstern MS to follow what has been copied by the scribe of the Raffles 18. 

Without a good knowledge of Jawi he passes judgement on the quality of the scribes writing, which he 
says is mediocre, although he is not in a position to judge. He makes a daring comment that the name of 
Allah (which he finds occurs frequently) has been written with double /lam/ [| # ] which are so small that 
to him they look like one /s/ and so he says the word looks more like /ash/ than /Allah/ because, 
according to him, “the /h/ is reduced to a miniscule slanting stroke” (p. 214). His pretension to be able to 
recognise good quality Jawi by trying to scrutinise the spelling of the word “Allah” does reveal his poor 
knowledge of the Jawi script. He does not know that there are various styles of writing the Jawi script. 

Besides that, he also complains about some peculiarities of the manuscript’s orthography, such as the 
writing of the letter /dal/ [ 2 ], which looks like /lam/ [ J ], but he never relates it to the mistake often 
found in the other manuscripts of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin, in particular the Raffles 18, where the correct 
word “adiraja” has been replaced by “al-diraja” by the scribe who mistook the letter /dal/ [ >] for /lam/ | 
J]. As far as I know only the Shellabear and Abdullah recensions use the word “diraja”, which is closer to 
“adiraja’, the suffix for the name of Seri Bija Diraja. But surprisingly Chambert-Loir is silent on this. He 
does not recognise the accuracy of the scribes of the Krusenstern MS in copying the word “adiraja”. For 
this I maintain that overall, the Krusenstern MS is better written. 

Chambert-Loir also mentions the Ciri but he has no comments whatsoever regarding the full text of 
the Ciri in the Krusenstern MS and he is silent about the fact that I am the only one, the first to have 
attempted to read and transcribe the Ciri in its complete form. Instead, he makes an unsubstantiated 
allegation that “the fascination for Old Javanese perverts a famous passage of the Sulalat al-Salatin, the 
Ciri.” The word “Ciri” in Old Javanese means “sign”, “distinctive mark’, “proof” or “evidence”, and in 
Malay refers to the supernatural mantra recited during the installation of a king. But instead of being 
unbiased, Chambert-Loir sarcastically remarks that it is “extremely surreal to try and read, and translate, a 
text in an unknown language by thumbing up a dictionary, even more so if the dictionary is one of Old 
Javanese, while the language is believed to be Sanskrit’ He cannot believe that this writer, who has 
studied Sanskrit during his undergraduate days, is quite capable of reading and transcribing the Ciri in 
the Rumi script. The sentiments that he has expressed only show that he has not read my book with care 
and diligence and has instead written his “review” with malicious prejudice and bias. 

Perhaps Chambert-Loir doesn't realise that most versions of the Sejarah Melayu, including the Raffles 
18, do not have the complete texts of the Ciri. While the few variant versions do contain parts of the Ciri, 
the texts are nevertheless incomplete and even the Sanskrit or Kawi words have not been correctly copied 
by the scribes. Due to his bias, Chambert-Loir is unable to make any fruitful comments about the 
“supernatural mantra’, yet blindly concludes that I have ignored or “feel entitled to ignore” the works of 


60 


past Orientalists, among others Winstedt, W. E. Maxwell, and Ph. S. van Ronkel. Chambert-Loir forgets 
that although I have read their work, I do not necessarily share their views. More so because the Ciri has 
either been missing or incomplete in their work. To his credit, Chambert-Loir does admit that he is “too 
incompetent” to discuss the transliteration and its translation. 

Clearly, one reason for Chambert-Loir to make such unintelligent criticisms of my transliteration of 
the Ciri is because of his inability to read the Ciri in its Jawi form, which also includes Sanskrit and Kawi 
words. From his comments in his review of my book, I have a strong suspicion that he feels more 
comfortable reading past Rumi transliterations of the Sulalat us-Salatin and that has pretentiously 
implied that he has read the various texts of the Malay Annals, including the Ciri, in Jawi. Despite his 
weakness in this aspect, his criticism is not constructive; rather, it is rude and vulgar. 

To add insult to injury, Chambert-Loir also demonstrates his callowness in his usage of the expression 
“Wa'llahu alam bissawab” and the more elaborate “Wa'llahu alam bissawab wa ilaihi ‘1 marjiu wal 
maab”. He has even absurdly counted the number of times this concluding expression is found in the 
Sulalat u's-Salatin. For example, he says that the expression “Wa'llahu alam bissawab” is repeated 
seventeen times and its shorter form, “Wa'llahu alam” is only written once. Based on his counting of the 
long and short closing formulae he then determines the number of narratives in the text of the Sejarah 
Melayu. Indeed, this is a latter-day example of what Edward Said meant when he discussed the “distortion 
and inaccuracy by the Orientalist” (Said 1978: 8). Chambert-Loir’s ignorance of the meanings of the 
Arabic expressions is also complemented by his inability to distinguish the rich presence of Old Javanese 
words in the Sejarah Melayu. As a result, he does not understand why the copyists of the Krusenstern MS 
used the phoneme /s/ for words like /syah/, and /S[y]ahru'l-nuwi, and why /syahid/ is spelt /sahid/ which 
necessitates an expert to indicate what the correct pronunciation of the word should be like. Neither does 
he understand why the Javanese word for “occasion” should be translated as “prastwa” and spelt 
/p/r/s/t/a/w/a/ in Jawi [ i481 (See Krusenstern MS 1798: f. cxlii); at other times the word may also be 
spelt /p/r/s/t/a/w/ [ sinh) or just /p/r/s/t/w/ [ guj] (which is Kawi in origin) and should be 
pronounced “prastawa” even though the modern Malay pronunciation is “peristiwa”. 

Chambert-Loir’s exasperation with this writer’s findings that Javanese words are found aplenty in the 
Sulalat us-Salatin could perhaps be traced back to the day when my book Sulalat us-Salatin was launched 
in late 2016. In my speech, I had openly criticised him for failing to recognise and understand the 
significance of the word “pituturan” which forms the subtitle of all versions of the Sulalat u’s-Salatin.”° I 
had told him that his commentary on the Sulalat us-Salatin and the title of his article “The Sulalat al- 
Salatin [sic] as a Political Myth” fail to take into account the meaning that the word “pituturan’” carries. It 
was not the intention of the author to create “political myth’, as suggested by Chambert-Loir. Furthermore, 
Chambert-Loir thinks that the correct title should be Sulalat al-Salatin and not Sulalat u’s-Salatin, which 
does show that he does not know Arabic pronunciation. 

His simplistic dismissal of the presence of Kawi words in the Sejarah Melayu reflects badly on his 
ignorance of such topics as Malay philology in the Nusantara linguistic context, which the late Professor 
Ismail Hussein mentioned in his MBRAS lecture in 1966. Chambert-Loir's criticism comes across as 
patronising, especially when he labels my argument in defence of the presence of innumerable words of 
Kawi origin as an act of “Javanese frenzy” (see p. 218 of his review). Chambert-Loir even described it as 
“barbaric” when I pointed out that the expression “sekali prastawa” was used by one of the Javanese 
copyists of the Krusenstern MS. He goes as far as to claim that it “does not mark any progress in 
philology” and even “sounds like a joke” (ibid.). Besides highlighting his ignorance of Malay philology, 
which he shows through his blind rejection of my usage of “[sic]” to indicate the archaic forms of words 
such as “menengar” (for “mendengar’), “tuha” (for “tua’), “rana” (for “ratna”), “karuniya” (for 
“kurnia’), “nityasa” (for “senantiasa”); and he even counted the number of footnotes I used in the book - 
which according to him totalled 1,579! Perhaps Chambert-Loir is uneasy that someone from the “Orient” 
is teaching him what he does not know. His obtuseness with regard to Malay philology is also shown by 
his criticism of this writer’s transliteration of the words “keinderaan” and “kembalilah” (see p. 33 of my 


61 


book). He says they should instead be read as “kendaraan” [sic] and “kayalah” because, he says, this is the 
reading in all other published versions of the Sejarah Melayu! How could a so-called expert in Malay 
traditional literature not understand the difference between the archaic word “keinderaan” and the 
modern Malay word “kendaraan” [sic, kenderaan]? Or the difference in meaning between the word 
“kembalilah” and “kayalah” in the sentence, “Maka Wan Empuk dan Wan Malini pun kembalilah [ “4s 
|] sebab mendapat anak raja itu’? He also criticised this writer's transliteration of the phrase, “dan segala 
ulama dan hukama meayarkan [emphasis added]” emas dan perak (p. 218), claiming that that the word 
“meayarkan” “is an incongruous creation on an Old Javanese base’; but in reality, he does not know that 
the Kawi word means “to unfold” or “spread out” and it accurately translates the action of the king, 
nobles, warrior, scholars, and ulama and judges to spread out their gold, silver and and jewels of all sorts. 

Chambert-Loir also accuses me of having changed the title “Hikayat Hamzah” to “Hikayat Hamurabi” 
on p. 26 of my book (see his review on p. 217). If anybody were to read the narrative about Raja Suran in 
the first chapter of my book (p. 26), it is clear that the copyist of the Sulalat us-Salatin has written: 
“Adapun fasal Raja Suran jikalau dihikayatkan semuanya seperti “Hikayat Hammurabih’” |sic] tebainya 
hikayat” (in English the sentence would be: “Regarding the story of Raja Suran, if all of it were to be 
narrated like the Hikayat Hammurabih [sic] it will be a thick hikayat”). In order to explain it further, I 
have also added a footnote (no. 92) to the word “Hammurabih” which reads: “In the Abdullah's published 
version [Situmorang and Teeuw, 1952: 20] and Shellabear’s text (1896: 25) the name Hammurabi is not 
used, but instead the name of Sayidina Hamzah is mentioned? I have changed nothing, and only 
transliterated what was written in the Krusenstern MS, which mentions the name “Hammurabih’. As a 
transliterator I can’t change what is written in the original Jawi. On the other hand, the Hikayat Hamzah 
is mentioned on p. 351 of my book (in the thirtieth narrative) which relates the story of Afonso 
Dalboquerque’s conquest of Melaka. The said sentence reads: “Maka oleh Sultan Ahmad dinugerai [sic] 
baginda Hikayat Hamzah [sic, Hikayat Amir Hamzah] (in English: “And so Sultan Ahmad presents the 
Hikayat Hamzah”). Judging from the two different stories and contexts of situation that I have tried to 
show, it is clear that Chambert-Loir is not telling the truth here. For someone who is quite incapable of 
checking the Jawi text of the Krusenstern MS himself, he just assumes that the name should be “Hikayat 
Hamzah” instead of “Hikayat Hamurabi” as written by the scribe. He even ludicrously dismisses the 
correct usage of the phrase “raja masyrik-maghrib” (king of the East and the West), and instead proposes 
“raja syarif-maghrib” (king of the Syarif of the West) on the ground that “syarif” refers to a descendant of 
the Prophet. 

His criticisms even extend to my way of punctuating certain sentences. He gives for example the 
sentence in f. iv: “Kata yang empunya ceritera pada suatu masa, bahawa Raja Iskandar anak Raja Darab 
Rum, bangsa Makaduniah nama negerinya Zulkarnain geranya, sekali baginda berjalan hendak melihat 
matari [sic, matahari] terbit, maka baginda sampai pada sar[had] dekat negeri Hindia”. Chambert-Loir 
adds /nya/ (which is not in the text) to the word “bangsa” and by so doing he assumes that my 
punctuation is wrong. Here again he shows his ignorance in terms of reading an archaic Malay sentence. 
In reality, the phrase “bangsa Makaduniah nama negerinya” is perfectly right. The word “bangsa” here 
denotes “descent” or “nation”. Thus Raja Iskandar, according to the sentence is the son of Raja Darab of 
Rome, of the Macedonian nation, being his country...” Chambert-Loir's concoction of the sentence will of 
course result in a change in meaning because “nya” is added to “bangsa”, which can be translated as “his 
race’. 

Another sentence punctuation (f. clxxi) which he claims to be wrong is: “Maka kata orang Melaka, 
Ini Benggali putih’ pada seorang Feringgi itu. Berpuluh-puluh orang Melaka meng[h]aru dia; ada yang 
mengurut misai, ada yang memutar janggut...” (And so the Melaka men said to one of the Franks, “This is 
a white Bengali.’ Scores of the Melaka men keep annoying him; some are stroking his moustache while 
others twisting his beard ...). To Malay readers this is certainly a valid punctuation because the sentence 
“This is a white Bengali” is addressed to, or is referring to, one of the Portuguese. What really makes the 
sentence in the Krusenstern MS different is that after the expression “Ini Benggali putih’, it is not followed 


62 


by the punctuation word “Maka” as found in some other versions, which would indicate that there is a 
new sentence. But Chambert-Loir thinks otherwise. He thinks the sentence should be: “Maka kata orang 
Melaka, ‘Ini Benggali putih’. Pada seorang Feringgi itu berpuluh-puluh orang Melaka mengharu dia” (see 
p. 216 of his review). One may ask why Chambert-Loir’ insists that his punctuation is the correct one 
because “it is found in all other editions.’ Is this really true scholarship? Or must the copyists of the 
Krusenstern MS be faulted for not following other copyists of the Malay Annals? 

His preposterous claim shows that he doesn’t understand or simply ignores the fact that the equivalent 
sentence found in the Krusenstern MS is different. Presumably he has not read the Raffles 18 version 
edited by Abdul Rahman Ismail (2009: 254) which has the sentence: “Ia ini Benggali putih” (He is a white 
Bengali). This is followed by “Maka seorang-seorang Feringgi itu berpuluh-puluh orang laki-laki 
mengerumuni dia” (Hence one after another of the Franks are surrounded by scores of men). Likewise, in 
Abdullah Munsyi’s text (Stumorang and Teeuw 1952: 270), the same sentence appears as: “Maka kata 
orang Melaka, “Ia ini Benggali putih. Maka pada seorang-seorang Feringgi itu (meaning “Hence to every 
Frank”) berpuluh-puluh orang Melaka mengerumuni dia.’ It doesn’t in any way indicate that “seorang- 
seorang refers to one lone Frank; rather it means one person after another. Only in the version edited by 
A. Samad Ahmad (1979: 244) does the sentence appear to refer to one Frank being surrounded by many 
Malays, which is similar to the Krusenstern MS whereby the words “Ini Benggali putih” refer to a single 
Frank. The sentence in A. Samad Ahmad’s edition reads: “Maka kata orang Melaka, ‘Ia ini Benggali 
putih’. Maka pada seorang orang Feringgi itu berpuluh-puluh orang Melaka mengerumuni dia, ada yang 
memutar janggutnya.... (Then said the Melaka men, “He is a white Bengali”. And at one of the Franks 
scores of the Melaka men surround him...). In the Shellabear edition (1977: 183), the sentence goes like 
this: “Maka kata orang Melaka, ‘Ia ini Benggali putih’. Maka pada seorang orang Feringgi itu berpuluh- 
puluh orang Melaka mengerumuni dia? Thus based on the Malay syntax, the sentence that I punctuated is 
perfectly correct, which Chambert-Loir does not understand. 

Like in many other instances of his reading of the Sulalat u's-Salatin, Chambert-Loir has obviously 
shown that he has not fully understood the language style of the Malays. This reminds me of the day that I 
criticised him for his misreading of the Kawi word “pituturan” (“petuturan”) in the Malay Annals in his 
2005 article. Thus, in his review of my book, he simply says that my edits do not make the book easy to 
read. Perhaps this could be due to his rejection of the influence of Old Javanese on the Sulalat us-Salatin. 
His shortcomings can also be seen from his obsession with the Raffles 18, which does not really reflect his 
ability in terms of reading Malay manuscripts. 

He also alleges that my transliteration of “jadi Islam di dalam ukum [hukum] Nabi Ibrahim” is a mere 
blunder (p. 216 of his review). He thinks the Jawi letters /alif/kaaf/mim/ [ eS!) should not be transcribed 
as /u/k/um/ but should instead be read as /agama/. In this writer's explanation in the book, I have stated 
that “ukum” is a variant of the word “hukum” in Jawi. Those who are familiar with Old Jawi know that in 
Malay manuscripts, the consonant /h/ could be either omitted from or added to a word. There are many 
examples of variant forms, such as “harta” (may be spelt as /arta/), “hulun” (also spelt /ulun/ and “hawar” 
(sometimes spelt /awar/), “alas” (may be spelt /halas/, “arit’: (may be spelt /harit/) and the name “Tun 
Aria’ (may be spelt as /Tun Haria/). Thus “ukum” could also be the reading for “hukum”. 

Chambert-Loir does not know that the word “hukum” is the Malay translation for the Arabic “sharia” 
(or “shariat’), a word that is also transcribed by the scribe of Krusenstern MS as “saringat’ (to show the 
Javanese accent). The reason why this writer reads it as “[h]ukum” is because Muslims believe that 
Abraham is one of the six Prophets upon whom have been conferred the shariat, known in English as 
Islamic canonical law. The same reading is found in the English translation of the Malay Annals by C. C. 
Brown (1952: 14). He translates “shariat” as the ordinance of the Prophet Abraham (the Chosen Friend of 
God). 

It becomes clear that Chambert-Loir does not know Arabic. Neither has he ever read the Qur’an. The 
word “sharia” in the Arabic language can also be translated as “ritual”, “liturgy” or “ordinance of God”. 
In the Holy Qur'an the Abrahamic code is known as Abrahams sharia or the code of Abraham, or 


63 


Abraham’s command (Qur'an 2: 124). “Command” refers to “Allah's Will”, “Decree” or “Purpose”. It was 
Abrahams sharia which laid the foundation of the sharia, or (h)ukum, of the teachings of all the Prophets, 
including Muhammad. The Qur’an contains a number of verses which include the command for believers 
to follow the sharia or millat of Abraham.”' 

Here, I have responded to each of the points that he has disputed. Every aspect of the criticisms, namely 
those pertaining to “classical” Malay language and grammar, the Old Jawi script of the pre-nineteenth 
century Malay language, Islamic Sufism, the Abrahamic code of laws and even his misconception that the 
word “al-Jawi” in the Krusenstern MS refers to a non-Javanese, only accentuates his ignorance of the 
study of Malay manuscripts, particularly the Sulalat u'’s-Salatin. He is very much confused when he says 
that the word “al-Jawi”, that is spelt /alif/lam/jim/alif! waw/ya/ | 45%], indicates that the person bearing 
this appellation is from Sumatra. Perhaps due to his weak command of the Malay language and ignorance 
of basic Arabic, he does not know that the Arabic word “al-Jawi”, when attached to the name of a person, 
does indeed refer to a Javanese (see Soetan Muhammad Zain 1954: 205). 


Conclusion 


As stated by Edward Said, European Orientalism, be it German, British or French, has become a kind of 
intellectual authority over the Orient within Western culture since the nineteenth century. The major fault 
of Chambert-Loir is that he perpetuates this reading with his criticism of my work on the Krusenstern MS. 
However, he falls short of the academic standards of Winstedt or Blagden from the colonial period, 
demonstrating his biases when reviewing “the new version of the Sejarah Melayu”, which I have 
disproved here. His inclination to be prejudiced against my work is probably personal (perhaps racist) but 
it could also be due to his poor command of not just “classical” Malay, but more importantly Old Jawi. I 
suspect that this bias has led him to put forward criticisms purely based on false assumptions and pure 
ignorance of the Malay language, the Jawi script and the Islamic belief - but above all, his refusal to accept 
the Kawi influence found in the Sulalat u'’s-Salatin - which reminds me of the wisdom of the Malay 
proverb, “Kalau tali kail panjang sejengkal laut dalam jangan diduga”, which in English is: “If [your] 
fishing line is only a span long, don’t try to fathom how deep the sea is.” 


‘In another manuscript of the Malay Annals, the copyist claimed that it was written on 12 Rabiul-awal 1023 H (22 April 1614 
CE) which happened to be a Tuesday. See E.U.L. MSS. Or. 458 New College 132. Mkm 644 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 
Further details on this discussion can be found in Chapter 1. 

* An Orientalist is someone from the West who studies the language, culture, history or customs in countries of Eastern Asia. 

> Ahmat Adam, Hikayat Hang Tuha (or Hang Tua), Petaling Jaya: SIRD (2018: 24). 

* See his classic work, Orientalism, London and Henley: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978. 

> One example of this authoritative statement is the way C. O. Blagden had to some extent convinced many Orientalists, and 
some Malays, that the word that is spelt /k/t/a/h/ [ ous | 

in Jawi which is found in the Sulalat us-Salatin should be pronounced /ku/ta/ha/ (Blagden (JMBRAS: 3 (1) 1925: 33). My 
research on the language used in the Hikayat Raja Pasai, however, has shown that it should instead be pronounced /ke/tah/ 
or /ka/tah/. The Pasai word, which is presently Acehnese, is an interrogative word for a question. In the Acehnese language, 
/ke/ is pronounced /keu/ (or /keuh/) (Aboe Bakar et al. 2001: 917); /tah/ or /tahe/ in Acehnese and gives an element of 
surprise (ibid.: 917). In Malay the word gives the synonym for “gerangan”. The fault of the European Orientalists is that they 
tried to equate /kutaha/ with the Sundanese word /kumaha/ which means “how?’, “what kind?” or “why?” (Hardjadibrata 
2003: 454). Thus, as shown by Teuku Iskandar, the editor of the Hikayat Aceh, /k/t/a/h/ should correctly be pronounced /ke- 
tah/ or /keu-tah/ or perhaps /keutahe/ but not /kutaha/. Unfortunately, the editorial committee of the Kamus Dewan prefers 
to follow the Orientalists’ pronunciation of the word as /kutaha/. 

° The Raffles 18 was also translated into English and edited by C.C. Brown; later the manuscript was edited and given a Rumi 
transliteration by Abdul Rahman Ismail, who had it published in 1995; two years after that the Raffles 18 was edited by 
Muhammad Haji Salleh. 

Ludang” is a Kawi word meaning “to finish’, “complete” or “to put an end to” (Zoetmulder 2000 [1]: 610). 

* Further details on last eight narratives of the Raffles 18 can be found in Chapter 2. 

” See Chapter 2 for a more complete discussion on the similarities between both versions. 

'° See R. O. Winstedt, “The Date, Author and Identity of the Original Draft of the Malay Annals” in Journal of the Malayan 

Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (1938 [16], 3: 27). 
'! See this writer’s recent work, Hikayat Raja Pasai (SIRD, 2019: xx-xxi). 
'* Incidentally, a Buddha statue was found in Bukit Siguntang and in the opinion of F. M. Schnitger it was probably dated in the 


7« 


64 


sixth century CE. Nik Hassan, a Malaysian archaeologist, however, estimates that the Bukit Siguntang image of the Buddha 
might have been sculpted between the late seventh century and early eighth century. See Nik Hassan Shuhaimi, “The Bukit 
Seguntang Buddha: A Reconsideration of Its Date’, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (1979 (52) 2: 
38-39). 

'? For further discussions on the princes, their names and the ways in which the author discussed the Hindu-Buddhist past of the 
Malays, see Chapter 2. 

'4 On the conversion of Parameswara see this writer’s paper, “The Early History of Melaka According to the Text of the Sulalat 
us-Salatin” read at the “Melaka In Fact” International Conference, 2-3 August 2019. 

'S For a more complete account of the character of Dhu’]-Qarnayn in the Qur'an, see Chapter 2. 

'e See Chapter 2 for a complete account of the misreading of the subtitle. 

'7 See Narrative 9 of the Raffles 18 regarding Sultan Mansur Syah’s visit to Majapahit. 

'§ For a full discussion of the variant texts of the Sejarah Melayu, please see Chapter 2. For a specific analysis of the Krusenstern 
MS, including information on its copyists, please see Chapter 3. 

'? See Henri Chambert-Loir, “One More Version of the Sejarah Melayu’, Archipel, 94 (2017) Varia (Electronic version) URL: 
http://archipel.revues. org/458. 

© See the discussion on “pituturan” in “Title of the Malay Annals”, in Chapter 1. 

*! The phrase “millat Ibrahim” in the Holy Qur’an suggests the creed of Abraham instead of the religion (deen) of Abraham. 
“Millat’ refers to “monotheism” as stated in Surah 5: 48: “For each of you, We have decreed your own law and methods. 
Had God willed, He would have made you one nation, but He tests you through what He has given each of you”. 


65 


Complete bibliography 


Manuscripts and facsimiles of manuscripts 


Cod. Or. 7263. Legaat Prof. Dr Snouck Hurgronje, 1936, Leiden. 

Cod. Or. 7349. Legaat Prof. Dr Snouck Hurgronje, Leiden. 

E.U.L. MSS 458 (Sejarah Melayu), Edinburgh New College Library. Mkm 644 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

E.U.L. MSS 459 (Adat Aceh), Edinburgh New College Library. Mkm 644 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

Farquhar MS. No. 5, Microfilm. University of Malaya Library. 

Leiden Cod. Or. 12026. Mkm 3488 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

Malay MS 1, John Rylands Library, University of Manchester. Mkm. 4698 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

Maleis handschriften 107, B5 no. 3. 

MS. 86 DBP (Munsyi Mohamad Alis manuscript) kept at the Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. Mkm. 5650 
Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

MSS 2260 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

MSS 2989 “Bintang Dua Belas” [The Twelve Constellations]. 

MS Malay d. 1. Radcliff Science Library, Oxford. 

Raffles Malay 35, Sejarah Melayu. Mkm 1637 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

Raffles Malay MS. No. 18. Sejarah Melayu. Mkm 1638 Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia. 

Sejarah Melayu, Jawi facsimile of Cod. Or. Leiden 7304 in Muhammad Yusoff Hashim, 1998. Hikayat Melayu atau 
Sulalatus-Salatin, Melaka: Institut Kajian Sejarah dan Patriotisme Malaysia. 


Unpublished typescript 


Ahmat Adam. 2019. “The Early History of Melaka According to the Text of the Sulalatu’s-Salatin”. Paper presented 
at the International Melaka in Fact Conference, 2- 4 August 2019. 


Dictionaries 


Hardjadibrata R. R (compiler). 2003. Sundanese English Dictionary. Jakarta: Pustaka Jaya. 

Mardiwarsito, L. 1981. Kamus Jawa Kuna Indonesi (revised edition). Ende-Flores: Penerbit Nusa Indah-Percetakan 
Arnoldus. 

Prawiroatmodjo, S. 1957. Bausastra Djawa-Indonesia. Surabaya: Penerbit Express & Marfiah. 

Purwadi. 2003. Kamus Basa Kawi-Indonesia. Yogyakarta: Penerbit Widyatama. 

Satjadibrata, R. 1950. Kamoes Soenda-Indonesia. Jakarta: Balai Pustaka. 

Sinaga, Richard. 1996. Kamus Bahasa Batak Toba-Indonesia. Jakarta: Dian Utama. 

Steingass, F. 2012. A Comprehensive Persian-English Dictionary, Springfield: Nataraj Books. 

Tambunan, Anggur P. 1977. Kamus Batak Toba-Indonesia. Jakarta: Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan Bahasa. 

Tamsyah, Budi Rahayu. 1996. Kamus Lengkep Sunda-Indonesia Indonesia-Sunda. Bandung: Pustaka Setia. 

Taylor, James L. 1959. A Portuguese-English Dictionary, London: George G. Harrap and Co. Ltd. 

Wilkinson, R. J. 1959. A Malay-English Dictionary (Romanised), 2 vols. London: Macmillan and Co. Ltd. 

Wirjosuparto, R. M. Sutjipto. 1958. Candakaranika Adipurwa Kamus Bahasa Kawi-Indonesia untuk S.M.A. bagian A 
dan jang sederadjat. Jakarta: Indira. 

Wojowasito, Soewojo. 1969. Kamus Kawi (Djawa Kuno) Indonesia. Malang: I.K.1.P. 

———. 1977. Kamus Kawi-Indonesia. Bandung: Penerbit C.V. Pengarang. 

Zoetmulder, P. J. (with the collaboration of $.O. Robson). 1982. Old Javanese-English Dictionary, 2 vols. ‘s- 
Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff. 

———. (trans. Darusuprapta dan Sumarti Suprayitna). 2000. Kamus Jawa Kuna Indonesia (2 vols.) Jakarta: 
Penerbit PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama with the collaboration of the Jakarta agency of the Koninklijk Instituut 
voor Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde. 


Encyclopaedias 


“Abjad”. 1960. The Encyclopaedia of Islam, New Edition, 1 (A-B). Leiden: E. J. Brill; London: Luzac and Co. 
Fahd, T. 1967. “Im al-Huruf’, Encyclopaedia of Islam, 3, Leiden: E. J. Brill. London: Luzac and Co. 
“Hurufiyya’. 1971. The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 3, Leiden: E. J. Brill. London: Luzac and Co. 

Netton, Ian Richard. 1998. Neoplatonism in Islamic Philosophy. 

“Nur Muhammad”. Encyclopedia of Religion, 2. 

Weil, G. - [G. S. Colin]. 1971. “Alphabets”, Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1, Leiden: E. J. Brill. London: Luzac and Co. 


Books and articles 


Abdul Rahman Ismail. 2008. “Sulalat-us-Salatin atau Sejarah Melayu: Penelitian Mukadimah, Judul dan 
Pengertian’, in Abdul Rahman Haji Ismail and Haron Daud (eds.), Sulalat-us-Salatin (Sejarah Melayu). 
Cerakinan Sejarah, Budaya dan Bahasa. Penang: Penerbit Universiti Sains Malaysia. 

———. (translit.) 2009. Sejarah Melayu The Malay Annals. Kuala Lumpur: MBRAS. 

Ahmat Adam. 2009. Letters of Sincerity: The Raffles Collection of Malay Letters (1780 - 1824): A Descriptive Account 
with Notes and Translation. Kuala Lumpur: Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

———. 2011. Sulalat u's-Salatin, transliterated, and edited with Introduction, Kuala Lumpur: Yayasan Karyawan. 

———. (ed. and translit.) 2016. Sulalat u's-Salatin Salatin yakni per[tuturan] segala raja-raja, Kuala Lumpur: 
Yayasan Karyawan. 

———. 2017. The New & Correct Date of the Terengganu Inscription, Petaling Jaya: SIRD. 

———. 2018. Hikayat Hang Tuha [atau Hikayat Hang Tua], Petaling Jaya: SIRD. 

———. 2019. Hikayat Raja Pasai, Petaling Jaya: SIRD. 

Al-Attas, Syed Naquib. 1963. Some Aspects of Sufism As Understood and Practised Among the Malays, Singapore: 
M.S.R.I. Ltd. 

———., 2011. Historical Fact and Fiction, Johor Bahru: Penerbit UTM Press. 

Alisjahbana, Takdir. 1956. Sedjarah Bahasa Indonesia, Jakarta: Pustaka Rakjat. 

Bastin, John and Roolvink, R. (ed.), 1964. Malayan and Indonesian Studies. Essays Presented to Sir Richard Winstedt 
on his eighty-fifth birthday, Oxford at the Clarendon Press. 

——-— and Benda, Harry. 1968. A History of Modern Southeast Asia, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 

Bausani, Alessandro. 1972. Indonesia dalam Laporan Pelajaran Antonio Pigafetta (Indonesian translation), Roma: 
Institute Italiano per Il Medio ed estremo Oriente cento Italiano di Cultura - Jakarta. 

Blagden, C. O. 1909. “Notes on Malay History’, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, No. 53 
(September). 

—— —. 1925. “An Unpublished Variant Version of the Malay Annals’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, 3 (1): 10-52. 

———. “Two Malay Letters from Ternate in the Moluccas, written in 1521 and 1522’, Bulletin of the School of 
Oriental Studies London Institution, vol. V1, 1930-32. 

Brown, C. C. (trans.) 1983. Sejarah Melayu ‘Malay Annals (with an introduction by R. Roolvink). Kuala Lumpur: 
Oxford University Press. 

———. 1948. “A Malay Herodotus’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. 

———. 1952. “Sejarah Melayu or “Malay Annals A Translation of Raffles MS. 18”, Journal of the Malayan Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, (25) 2 and 3 (October). 

Chambert-Loir, Henri. 2017. “One More Version of the Sejarah Melayu’, Archipel 94, p.211-221. Varia (Electronic 
version) URL: http://archipel.revues.org/458. 

Cheah, Boon Kheng (Compiler). 2009. Sejarah Melayu (The Malay Annals), MS. Raffles No. 18. Transcribed by 
Abdul Rahman Ismail, Reprint 17. Kuala Lumpur: Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

Cole, Juan R. 1994. “The World as Text: Cosmologies of Syaykh Ahmad al-Ahsa’i’, Studia Islamica (80). 

Cortesa6, Armando (ed.) 1967 [1944]. The Suma Oriental of Tome Pires, London: The Hakluyt Society. 

Cowan, H.K.J. 1937. De “Hikajat Malem Dagang”. Atjehsch Heldendicht, Tekst en Toelichting. ‘s-Gravenhage: Het 
Koninklijk Instituut voor de Taal-, Land-, en Volkenkunde van Nederl.- Indie. 

Crecelius, Daniel and Beardow, E. A. 1979. “A Reputed Acehnese Sarakata of the Jamal al-Lil Dynasty’, Journal of 
the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 52 (2): 51-66. 

Dakers, C. H. 1939. “The Malay Coins of Malacca’, Journal of the Malayan Branch, Royal Asiatic Society, (17) 1. 


Daud, Kalam and T. A. Sakti. 2009. Qanun Meukuta Alam dalam Syarah Tadhkirah Tabagat Tgk. Di Mulek dan 
Komentarnya. Banda Aceh: Syiah Kuala University 

Douglas, F. W. 1949. “Sidelights on the Malay Annals, in Rolland Braddel n.p. 

Foster, William (ed.) 1934. The Voyage of Thomas Best to the East Indies, 1612-1614. London: The Hakluyt Society. 

Gibson- Hill, C. A. 1955. “Johore Lama and other ancient sites on the Johore River’, Journal of the Malayan Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, 28 (2): 127-197. 

———. 1956 (a). “On the alleged death of Sultan Alauddin of Johore at Acheh in 1613”, Journal of the Malayan 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 29 (1): 125-145. 

———. 1956 (b). “The Malay Annals: the history brought from Goa’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, 29 (1): 1875-188. 

Harun Aminurrashid. 1966. Kajian Sejarah Perkembangan Bahasa Melayu, Singapura: Pustaka Melayu. 

Hervey, D. F. A. 1884. “Valentyn’s Description of Malacca’, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
no. 13 (June). 

———. (trans.) 1885. “Valentiyn’s Account of Malacca’, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
(15), June: 119-138. 

Hooker, Virginia Matheson and Hooker, M. B. 2001. John Leyden’s Malay Annals. MBRAS Reprint 20, Kuala 
Lumpur: Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

Hooykaas, C. 1947. Over Maleise Literatuur. Leiden: E. J. Brill . 

Hossein Nasr, Seyyed et al. 2017. The Study Quran. A New Translation and Commentary, New York: HarperCollins 
(Paperback edition). 

Iskandar, T. 1967. “Three Malay Historical Writings in the First Half of the 17" Century’, Journal of the Malaysian 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 40 (2): 38-53. 

Jelani Harun. 2009. Bustan al-Salatin. A Malay Mirror for Rulers. Penang: Penerbit Universiti Sains Malaysia. 

Johns, Anthony H. 1993. “Islamization in Southeast Asia: Reflections and Reconsiderations with Special Reference 
to the Role of Sufism’, Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 3 (1), June. 

———. 1955. “Dakaik al-Huruf by Abd al-Rauf of Singkel’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland, London. 

Jones, Alan. 1962. “The Mystical Letters of the Qur’an’, Studia Islamica (16), Paris. 

Kassim Ahmad. 1962. Hikayat Hang Tuah, Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 

Kobata, Atsushi and Matsuda, Mitsugu. 1969. Ryukyuan Relations with Korea and South Sea Countries. An 
Annotated translation of Documents in the Rekidai Hoan, Kyoto: (Publisher: Atsushi Kobata). 

Linehan, W. 1933. “Source of the Malacca, Johore and Pahang Genealogies in the Bustan al-Salatin’, Journal of the 
Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 11 (2): 144. 

———. (a). 1947. “Notes on the Texts of the Malay Annals’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 20 (2): 107- 116. 

———. (b). 1947. “The Sources of the Shellabear Text of the Malay Annals’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society 20 (2): 105-106. 

Macgregor, I.A. 1955. “Johore Lama in the Sixteenth Century’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 28 (2): 48-126. 

Madjo Indo, Aman Datuk (ed.) 1959. Sejarah Melayu, 2 vols. Jakarta: Penerbit Jambatan & Gunung Agung. 

Malik, Mohd. Zamberi. 2006. Pensejarahan Patani [the historiography of Patani], Kuala Lumpur: Penerbit Universiti 
Malaya. 

Marrison, G. E. 1955. “Persian Influence in Malay Life (1280 - 160)’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, 28, (1). 

Marsden, W. 1986. The History of Sumatra. Singapore: Oxford University Press. 

Maxwell, W. E. 1878. “Notes on Two Perak manuscripts’, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
(2): 183-193. 

———. 1882. “The History of Perak from Native Sources’, Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 
(9): 85-108. 

Milner, Anthony. 1982. Kerajaan: Malay Political Culture on the Eve of Colonial Rule. Tuscon: University of Arizona 
Press for the American Association of Asian Studies. 

Monier- Williams, W. 1999. Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Etimologicallyand Philologically Arranged with Special 
Reference to Cognate Indo-European Languages (New edition, greatly enlarged and improved with the 


collaboration of E. Leumann and C. Capeller), New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pte Ltd. 

Moy, Timothy J. 1976/77. “The Sejarah Melayu Tradition of Power and Political Order: A Study in Political 
Legitimation” M. A. Thesis, University of Malaya. 

Muhammad Haji Salleh (ed.) 1997. Sulalat al-Salatin yaani Perteturun Segala Raja-Raja (Sejarah Melayu), Kuala 
Lumpur: Yayasan Karyawan dan Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 

Muller, Werner. 1963. “Mazdak and the Alphabet-Mysticism of the East’, History of Religions, 3 (1), Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press. 

Muzzi, Geraldo Affonso. 2002. “The Portuguese in Malay Land.’ A Glossary of Portuguese Words in the Malay 
Language, n. p. 

Netscher, E. 1870. De Nederlanders in Djohor en Siak 1602 tot 1865. Historische Beschrijving. Verhandelingen van 
het Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen deel xxxv, Batavia: Bruining & Wijt. 

Nik Hassan Shuhaimi. 1979. “The Bukit Seguntang Buddha: A Reconsideration of Its Date’, Journal of the 
Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (52) 2: 

Pinto, F. Mendez. 1969. The Voyages and Adventures of Fernand Mendez Pinto (translated into English by H. 
Cogan, 1653). London: Dawsons of Pall Mall. 

Raimy Che-Ross. 2002. “Malay Manuscripts in New Zealand’, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, (75) 2. 

Reid, Anthony. 1988. Southeast Asia in the Age of Commerce 1450 - 1680: Volume One: The Lands Below the Winds, 
New Haven and London: Yale University Press. 

Roolvink, R. 1967. “The Variant Versions of the Malay Annals’, Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land-en Volkenkunde (123) 3: 
301-324. 

Samad Ahmad, A. (ed.) 1979. Sulalatus Salatin (Sejarah Melayu). Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. 

Savage-Smith, E. (ed.) 2004. Magic and Divination in Early Islam, Aldershot: Ashgate Variorum. 

Shellabear, W.G. 1898. “An Account of Some of the Oldest Malay Mss. Now Extant’, Journal of the Straits Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society, No. 31, July. 

———. (ed.) 1917 (1896). Sejarah Melayu or The Malay Annals (vols. 1 and 2), Singapore: The Malaya Publishing 
House Ltd. 

———. (ed.) 1957 (1896, first Jawi edition). Sejarah Melayu or The Malay Annals. Singapore: The Malaya 
Publishing House. 

——W—. (ed.) 1981. Sejarah Melayu. Kuala Lumpur: Penerbit Fajar Bakti Sdn Bhd. 

Sitomurang, T. D, A. Teeuw and Amal Hamzah (eds.) 1952. Sedjarah Melaju Menurut Terbitan Abdullah ibn 
Abdulkadir Munsji. Djakarta: Penerbit Djambatan. 

Skeat, Walter William. 1984. Malay Magic. Being an Introduction to the Folklore and Popular Religion of the Malay 
Peninsula, Singapore: Oxford University Press. 

Teixeira, Fr. Manuel. 1972. “The Influence of Portuguese on the Malay Language’, Journal of Malayan Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, vol. 35, pt. 1. 

Thomaz, Luis Filipe F. R. 1988. “Pengaruh Melayu dalam Peradaban Orang Portugis’, Beriga, Oktober- Disember. 

———. 2000. Early Portuguese Malacca. Macau: Macau Territorial Commission for the Commemorations of the 
Portuguese Discoveries. 

Tiele, P., A. 1877. “De Europeers in de Maleische Archipel’, Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land, en Volkenkunde. 

Tiele, P A. 1886. “De Europeers in den Maleischen Archipel (1611 - 1618)” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-, en 
Volkenkunde. 

Wade, Geoff (trans.) 2005. Southeast Asia in the Ming Shi-lu: an open access resource, Singapore: Asia Research 
Institute and the Singapore E-Press, National University of Singapore, http://epress.nus.edu.sg/msl. 

Wang, Gungwu. 1968. “The First Three Rulers of Malacca’, Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society 41, no. 1 (July). 

Wilkinson, R. J. 1933. “The Sri Lanang Pedigree’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 11 
(2):148- 149, 

———. 1935. “The Malacca Sultanate’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (13) 2. 

Winstedt, R. O. 1938 (a). “The Date, Author and Identity of the Orignal Draft of the Malay Annals’, Journal of the 
Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, (16) 3. 

———. 1938 (b). “The ‘Malay Annals’ or ‘Sejarah Melayu”, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, (16) 3. 


———. 1940. “Valentijn’s Copy of the Sejarah Melayu’, Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
18 (2): 151. 

———. 1948. “The Malay Founder of Medieval Malacca’, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, 
University of London, (12) 3 and 4. 

Wolters, O. W. 1970. The Fall of Srivijaya, Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 

Yusuf, Imtiyaz. 2004. (ed.) Measuring the Effect of Iranian Mysticism on Southeast Asia, Bangkok: Cultural Centre, 
Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran. 


Index 


Abdullah Munsyi 3, 5, 18, 27-28, 62, 64, 67, 99, 100, 110 
Abjad Hawaz xii, 79 

Abrahamic code 111-12 

Aceh 

Aceh-Johor relations 7, 17, 26, 29, 57, 63 

Adat Aceh 4, 13, 14 

Hikayat Aceh 56, 94 

Language 6, 8, 54, 58, 62, 66, 94, 104 

Religion 81, 88-89 

Rulers, aristocracy 4, 8, 10, 12, 15-16, 57 

See also Orang Kaya Sogoh 

Afonso Dalboquerque 3, 47, 61-62, 68-69, 74, 109 
‘Alauddin Ri’ayat Syah 

Son of Sultan Mansur Syah (Melaka) 6, 41-42, 46-48, 67 
Son of Sultan Mahmud (Johor) 3, 5, 6-9, 10, 15-18, 21, 25, 28-29, 38, 55, 63, 92, 97 
Son of Sultan Ali Jalla Abdul Jalil Syah Johor) 6, 10-12, 15-17, 28-29 
Alphabet mysticism 75-76, 77 

Authorship of the Sejarah Melayu 1-2, 4-6, 9, 11-12, 14-15, 18, 20-21, 22, 25-26, 27-28, 58, 62-64, 91-92 
Tun Seri Lanang, background 10-11, 14-15 

Ba-li-mi-su-la 48 

See also Parameswara and Iskandar Syah 

Basic elements 77 

Batu Sawar 7, 12-14, 57 

Bendahara Paduka Raja 4, 7, 10-11, 14, 57-58, 92 
Bendahara Seri Maharaja 7 

Benggali putih 109-10 

Bertam 44 

Bicitram Syah 54, 59 

Blagden 

Blagden, Charles Otto 42, 63, 66, 93, 94, 112 

Blagden manuscript 2, 9, 17-18, 21, 28, 61, 63-65, 69, 94-95, 100 
Bo Banya 54 

Bota/Bhuta 54, 103 

Bukit Siguntang 7, 34, 96-97 

Champa 36, 54, 56, 78-79 

China 37, 75 

China-Melaka relations 35, 43-46, 57 

See also Hang Li Po and Ming Shi-lu 

Chiri/ciri 58, 104-6 

Demang Lebar Daun 1-2, 30, 40, 54-55, 91 

Dharmasraya 43 

Dhu'l-Qarnayn 26, 33, 38-40, 53, 97-98 

Diogo Lopes de Sequeira 62 

Eight-year cycle 80, 81-83 

Goa 6, 8-9, 14-15, 65, 67-69 

Hang Kesturi 28, 55, 102 

Hang Li Po 56-57 

See also China 

Hang Tuah/Hang Tuha 19, 26, 53, 55-56, 59, 66, 93, 99, 102 
Hilir 

Raja Di Hilir/Yang Dipertuan Di Hilir 6, 8, 12, 32 

Hurufi 75 


Ibn ‘Arabi 81, 88-89 

Ibrahim Jamrut 

See Krusenstern manuscript, copyists 

Iskandar Syah 34-35, 38, 40, 42, 48, 97 

See also Parameswara 

Iskandar Dhu’l-Qarnayn 26, 33, 38-40, 53, 97 
Islamisation 79, 81, 84, 87, 89 

Ismail Hussein 3, 96, 98-100 

Jawa Kuno 1, 4-5, 11, 22, 24, 28, 31-33, 38, 43, 52-56, 58, 95-96, 98-100, 103-4, 106-8, 111-12 
Kaid Hindi 39 

Kapitan Mor 65-66, 69 

See also Portuguese, Language 

Karna Pandeyan 34, 54 

Kawi 

See Jawa Kuno 

Kobata, Atsushi 46-47 

Krusenstern 

Von Krusenstern, Adam Johann 51, 64 

Krusenstern manuscript 2-7, 9-10, 13-25, 27-30, 33-34, 48, 51-60, 64-65, 69, 95-96, 100-105, 107-112 
Krusenstern manuscript, copyists 2, 51 

See also Orientalism, Chambert-Loir, Henri 

Kutika 

Kutika lima 83-84 

Kutika tujuh 85 

Laksamana 47, 55-56, 59-60, 93 

Leyden, John 2-3, 5, 10, 24, 27, 32, 51, 53, 55, 62, 64, 68-69, 93, 100 
Maharaja Bhuri 43 

Mahmud Syah 21, 25, 28-30, 41, 47-49, 62, 64 
Majapahit 17-19, 26, 44, 53, 57, 59-60, 102 

Malik al-Saleh/u’s-Salih 37, 78 

Malik al-Zahir 78 

Mansur Syah 6-7, 13, 18-19, 28, 41, 46, 48-49, 55-57, 102 
Matsuda, Mitsugu 46-47 

Megat Iskandar Syah 37, 44, 49, 57 

See also Raja Besar Muda and Raja Kecil Besar 
Melaka 

Malacca Sultanate 20-21, 31, 40, 44, 48, 62, 68, 74, 93 
Malacca Sultanate, genealogy 48-49 
Portuguese/colonial Malacca 20, 52, 61, 64, 74 

See also Portuguese 

Minangkabau 38, 97 

Ming Shi-lu 29, 36-37, 41, 43-45, 47 

Mughayat Syah [sic Maayat] 7-9, 12, 15-16, 30, 57 
Muhammad Syah 7, 35-37, 42, 45, 48 

See also Raja Tengah and Sri Maharaja 

Muhammad Tahir al-Jawi 

See Krusenstern manuscript, copyists 

Munsyi Mohamad Ally 3, 16, 18, 92 

Muzaffar Syah 7, 41, 45-46, 48-49, 55, 62 

See also Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah and Raja Kasim 
Nagarakrtagama 58 

Name taboo 56, 58 

Nila Pahlawan 34, 38, 54, 97 

Numerology 76 

Nuruddin ar-Raniri 4, 88-89, 92 

Old Javanese 

See Jawa Kuno 


Old Jawi 32, 100-1, 103, 111-12 

Orang Kaya Sogoh 8, 14-15, 58 

See also Aceh 

Orientalism 93-94, 96, 101-3, 105, 112 

Chambert-Loir, Henri 101-112 

Pahang 11, 13-14, 16, 28, 63 

Palembang 3, 20, 25-26, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42-44, 86, 100 

Panji Tales 19, 57, 99 

Parameswara 34-38, 43-46, 48-49, 97 

See also Iskandar Syah 

Pasai 4, 17, 34-35, 37, 62, 78, 88, 94 

Hikayat Raja Pasai 17, 35, 91, 94, 96 

Patani 5, 7, 20, 62, 65, 81, 88 

Patih Ludang 21, 28, 95 

Pekan Tuha 18 

Pertuturan/petuturan/pituturan 1, 5-6, 9, 21-24, 26, 31-33, 40-41, 55-56, 62, 91, 98, 107-110 

Pigafetta, Antonio 65 

Portuguese 4, 10-11, 16, 21, 25, 28-29, 31, 38, 41, 47, 63, 68 

Language 61-62, 64-67, 69-74 

See also Melaka, Portuguese/colonial Malacca 

Prapanca 58 

Raffles MS no. 18/Raffles 18 2-6, 9-10, 12, 14, 17-21, 23-25, 27-29, 31, 35, 41, 47, 51-52, 56, 61-70, 91-92, 94-95, 99- 
101, 104-106, 110 

Raja Besar Muda 35, 48 

See also Megat Iskandar Syah and Raja Kecil Besar 

Raja Bongsu 2, 8, 11-12, 14, 16 

Raja Husin 

See ‘Alauddin Riayat Syah, Son of Sultan Mansur Syah (Melaka) 

Raja Kasim 45-46, 48-49 

See also Muzaffar Syah and Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah 

Raja Kecil Besar/Raja Kecik Besar 34-35, 38, 42, 48 

See also Megat Iskandar Syah and Raja Besar Muda 

Raja Mamat 

See Mahmud Syah 

Raja Tengah 35, 48 

See also Muhammad Syah and Sri Maharaja 

Rekidai hoan 41, 46-47 

Ryukyu 46 

San-fo-chi 

See Srivijaya 

Sang Maniaka 40 

Sang Nila Utama 1, 38, 40, 97 

Sang Supraba 1, 30, 33, 38, 40, 55, 91, 96-97 

Science of letters/ilmu huruf xii 

Seri Nara Diraja 7, 46 

Shellabear, William 2-3, 5, 10-11, 15-16, 18-21, 24-25, 27-28, 32, 55-56, 62-67, 69-93, 99-100, 102, 104-105, 110 

Siam 

Kingdom 65, 87 

Language 54 

Melaka-Siam relations 44, 46, 61-62 

Singapore 3, 100 

Singapura 38, 40, 42, 44, 97 

See also Tumasik 

Sri Maharaja 35-37, 41, 44, 49, 59 

See also Muhammad Syah and Raja Tengah 

Sri Parameswara Dewa Syah 45-46, 48-49 

See also Muzaffar Syah and Raja Kasim 


Sri Tri Buana 1-2, 30, 38, 40, 91 

Srivijaya 43-44 

Sufism 20, 75, 77, 87-88, 95 

Sultan Ahmad 28, 41, 47-48, 68-69, 109 

Surah Al-Kahf 39-40, 97 

Syahbandar 20 

Syi ites 78 

Tarekat 77 

See also Sufism 

Terengganu Stone/Batu Bersurat Terengganu 53, 78, 96 
Time reckoning 79, 83 

Tome Pires 37, 44, 57 

Tramberi Tribuana 38-39 

Tumasik 38, 40, 44, 97 

See also Singapore 

Tun Ali Hati 3-4, 17, 21, 25, 28-29, 63, 70, 95, 100 
Tun Bambang 4-9, 12, 21, 24-25, 64, 92 

Tun Fatimah 6, 46 

Tun Perak 14 

Tun Seri Lanang 

See Authorship of the Sejarah Melayu 

Upeh 20, 66 

Valentyn/Valentijn/Valentyn, Frangois 17, 24, 27, 29, 42, 56, 93 
Wahdat al-wujud 88-89 

Wan Empu/Empuk 54, 58 

Wan Malini 54, 100, 108 

Wan Sundari 40, 46, 54, 100 

Winstedt, Sir Richard Olaf 2, 4-5, 9, 15, 17-19, 21-24, 27-29, 32-33, 55-56, 62-63, 92-96, 98-99, 104, 106, 112 
Wolters, Oliver 38, 43-44 

Zakat Long 

See Krusenstern manuscript, copyists 

Zheng He 36 


